HHS Instruction 1104-1: Delegated Examining Operations
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 1104-1, Delegated Examining Operations, dated 08/03/2020

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 300-1, HHS Administrative Careers With America (ACWA), dated October 26, 2015

HHS Instruction 337-1, Category Rating and Selection Procedures, dated November 3, 2010

Background:
The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) delegated to HHS, via Interagency Delegated Examining Agreement, HHS-1, the authority to examine applicants for competitive service positions for all occupational series and grade levels nationwide. This Instruction is established to provide HHS-wide policy on conducting Delegated Examining (DE) Operations under Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.) Part 1104, in accordance with the operational procedures and agency responsibilities prescribed in the OPM Delegated Examining Operations Handbook (DEOH).

This issuance is effective immediately and must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/

J. Blair Duncan
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Chief Human Capital Officer

Subject: Delegated Examining Operations
1104-1-00 Purpose
1104-1-10 References
1104-1-20 Coverage
1104-1-30 Definitions
1104-1-40 Responsibilities
1104-1-50 Policy
1104-1-60 Documentation and Accountability

1104-1-00 Purpose
This Instruction establishes Delegated Examining (DE) policy and procedural guidance for the Department of Health and Human Services (Department or HHS) Human Resources Offices and designated staff assigned to conduct DE operations, as authorized by the Interagency Delegated Examining Agreement, HHS-1, between the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) and HHS.

This policy should be used in conjunction with the OPM's Delegated Examining Operations Handbook (DEOH) and the references listed in this Instruction.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

1104-1-10 References
5 U.S.C. §1104, Delegation of Authority for Personnel Management 
5 U.S.C. §2108, Veteran; disabled veteran; preference eligible 
5 U.S.C. §3305, Competitive service; examinations; when held 
5 U.S.C §§3309 through 3318, Examination, Certification, and Appointment 
5 U.S.C. §3319, Alternative ranking and selection procedures 
5 U.S.C. §3327, Civil Service Employment Information 
5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 211, Veteran Preference
5 CFR Part 300, Employment (General)
5 CFR Part 330, Recruitment, Selection and Placement 
5 CFR Part 332, Recruitment and Selection Through Competitive Examination
5 CFR Part 337, Subpart C, Examining System 
29 CFR Part 1607, Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures 
Interagency Delegated Examining Agreement (HHS-1) between OPM and HHS
OPM Delegated Examining Operations Handbook (DEOH) - PDF
OPM Delegated Examining Certification Program Guide - PDF
OPM Vet Guide
HHS Instruction, 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, 04/08/2020
1104-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
This Instruction covers delegated examining HHS-wide. It does not apply to merit promotion, the excepted service, or the Senior Executive Service (see 5 U.S.C. §1104).

The following HHS Operating and Staff Divisions (OpDivs and StaffDivs) are authorized to conduct delegated examining activities under the Interagency Delegated Examining Agreement, HHS-1:

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS)
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)
Indian Health Service, Navajo Region (IHS)
Indian Health Service, North Plains Region (IHS)
Indian Health Service, Rockville Headquarters (IHS)
Indian Health Service, Southeast Region (IHS)
Indian Health Service, Southwest Region (IHS)
Indian Health Service Western Region Human Resources Center (IHS)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Office of Inspector General (OIG)
Office of Medicare Hearings and Appeals (OMHA)
Staffing Recruitment Operations Center (SROC)


1104-1-30 Definitions
ACWA, or Administrative Careers With America. ACWA was the result of a 1979 class action law suit concerning an exam OPM then used to evaluate candidates for certain positions at the GS-5 and GS-7 grade levels across government. As a result, OPM was required to develop assessment tools for the positions covered. As of 2007, federal agencies are no longer required to use the ACWA assessment tools and may use any other validated (i.e., job-related) assessment tool(s) when filling competitive service positions. Such assessment tools must comply with the requirements specified in this Instruction (see Section 1104-1-50, Policy, Job Analysis and Assessments).
Category Rating. Category rating is a method of evaluating candidates who meet eligibility and minimum qualification requirements for the position by assessing the applicants' experience, education, and training and placing them into pre-defined "quality categories" rather than assigning individual numerical scores. Category rating is synonymous with alternative rating described in 5 U.S.C. §3319.
Delegated Examining. OPM may delegate authority to an executive agency to conduct delegated examining, i.e., examine applicants for competitive service positions that are open to all U.S. citizens including current federal employees. Delegated examining is synonymous with competitive examining. (5 U.S.C. §1104)
Direct Hire Authority. A Direct Hire Authority (DHA) permits an agency who has delegated examining authority to hire, after public notice, any qualified applicant to fill competitive service positions at GS-15 and below without having to rate applicants or apply veterans' preference (5 CFR 337, Subpart B).
Pass overs and Objections. For full definitions, see DEOH, Chapter 6, Section D.
Pass over. An agency request to "pass over" a preference eligible to select a non-preference eligible.
Objection. An agency request to remove a preference eligible from consideration from a certificate.
Preference Eligible. Individuals who receive preference in appointment over other applicants because of their military service or because they are a family member of a military service member. See 5 U.S.C. §2108(3) for full definition.
