
Issuing Certificates.
HHS DE certificates are open for 240 calendar days, with no extensions. CTAP, ICTAP, and the RPL must be cleared at initial announcement, in accordance with HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs.
Names of qualified candidates are listed in alphabetic order, with preference eligibles listed ahead of non-preference eligibles, within each quality category. Veterans' preference applies to each category; however, points are not assigned. Qualified preference eligibles with a compensable service-connected disability of 10 percent or more (i.e., CP and CPS) are listed in the highest quality category, except for scientific and professional positions at General Schedule (GS)-9 level or higher.
All candidates in the highest quality category are referred, with veteran preference eligibles listed ahead of non-veterans. If there are fewer than three (3) candidates in the highest category, the highest and second highest categories may be merged before a certificate is issued or a selection is made.
Only preference eligible candidates in the highest quality category are referred when it is apparent that non-preference eligible candidates are not within reach for selection, or when there are a sufficient number of preference eligible candidates to consider to fill the vacant position(s).
Order of selection:
CTAP candidates;
RPL candidates
ICTAP candidates;
Eligibles who lost consideration due to erroneous certification;
Eligibles in the highest quality category (including CPS and CP veterans); and
Eligibles in other quality categories, as needed.
The Indian Health Service must give selection priority in accordance with 25 U.S.C. §5117 prior to applying veterans' preference provisions.
If there are only preference eligibles or only non-preference eligibles in the highest quality category, the hiring manager may select any eligible candidate in the highest quality category.
Selecting officials may not select a non-preference eligible if there is a qualified preference eligible in the same category unless an approval to pass over the preference eligible is obtained in accordance with the Pass Overs and Objections of Preference Eligibles procedures below. If a request to pass over a veteran has been submitted, selection(s) may be made once approval is received from either the OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Director (for pass overs and objections not requiring OPM approval) or OPM (for pass overs and objections requiring OPM approval).
Pass Overs and Objections of Preference Eligibles.
Pass Overs and Objections Not Requiring OPM Approval
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Directors (HRDs) may approve or deny objection or pass over requests of preference eligibles with less than 30 percent compensable service-connected disability, or an applicant with derived preference, for competitive service positions within their organization. This authority may not be redelegated below the OpDiv/StaffDiv HRD level.
A copy of the HRD's approval must be sent to HHS OHR Policy and Accountability Division (PAD) within 14 calendar days of the date of approval, via employmentpolicy@hhs.gov, and include the following supporting documentation:
SF-62, Agency Request to Passover a Preference Eligible or Object to an Eligible, signed by the HRD;
Resume/Application Package, including documents supporting veterans' preference claim;
Copy of Position Description;
Copy of Vacancy Announcement;
Certificate of Eligibles; and
A memorandum approved by the HR Director with a description of the reason sufficient to sustain an objection/pass over.
Pass Overs and Objections Requiring OPM Approval
The following objection and pass over requests require OPM approval, and must be submitted to PAD, before making selections:
A pass over of any preference eligible with a 30 percent or more compensable service-connected disability, in accordance with 5 USC §3318(c)(2)  and the OPM Vet Guide;
A pass over of a preference eligible based on medical disqualification, in accordance with 5 CFR Part 339, specifically 5 CFR §§339.201 and 339.306 ; and
Objections based on suitability for federal employment for positions in the competitive service and excepted service positions, if the excepted service authority or position authorizes non-competitive conversion to the competitive service, as specified under 5 CFR §731.101 .
The same documentation listed in Q.1.b. above is submitted to PAD at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for review/concurrence and OPM approval.
No correspondence is sent to a 30 percent or more compensable disabled applicant until PAD concurrence is received. Once PAD concurrence is received, the OHRO sends a notice to the CPS candidate and submits a copy of the sent notice to employmentpolicy@hhs.gov. Information that must be included in notice(s) is outlined in the DEOH, Chapter 6.
Only after OPM has approved the pass over of the preference eligible may the 30 percent or more compensable disabled veteran be passed over and another applicant selected.
Direct Hire Authority.
A Direct Hire Authority (DHA) (5 CFR Part 337, Subpart B) permits an agency to hire, after public notice, any qualified applicant without regard to 5 U.S.C. §§3309-3318 , 5 CFR Part 211, or 5 CFR Part 337, Subpart A, to fill competitive service positions at GS-15 and below.
A DHA expedites hiring by eliminating category rating and veterans' preference; however, public notice requirements outlined in 5 U.S.C. §§3327  and 3330 , and 5 CFR Part 330, Subpart A, must be followed when filling positions under a DHA (5 CFR §337.203). Applicants who apply during an open vacancy announcement may be considered, per the DEOH, Chapter 2. Priority selection under 5 CFR Part 330 (CTAP/ICTAP) must also be given to eligible applicants.
Selectee(s) must meet all eligibility and qualification requirements for the position.
Executive agencies with delegated examining authority, such as HHS, may use a government-wide DHA. For available government-wide DHAs, see OPM.gov. OPM may also grant an agency-specific DHA to address a critical hiring need or a severe shortage of candidates.
OHROs must submit the following information to request an OpDiv/StaffDiv-specific direct hire authority:
Position title(s), series, grade level(s), and locations(s) covered;
Type of DHA requested (severe shortage of candidates or critical hiring need);
Proposed duration of the DHA and an explanation why this period is needed;
Evidence described in 5 CFR §§337.204 or 337.205 to support a DHA based on a severe shortage of candidates or critical hiring need, and explain how the evidence establishes a severe shortage of candidates or critical hiring need, as defined under 5 CFR §337.202 for the positions requested (for additional guidance, see DEOH, Chapter 2, and OPM.gov);
Identify a point of contact for questions and requests for further information; and
Send the request to the HHS OHR Policy and Accountability Division (PAD) at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for review/concurrence and OPM approval.
Two (2) authority codes must be used when processing DHA personnel actions, in accordance with the DEOH and OPM Guide to Processing Personnel Actions, Chapter 9, Career and Career-Conditional Appointments.
PAD, on behalf of OPM, may request information from OpDivs/StaffDivs on their use of direct hire authorities (5 CFR §337.206(c)).
Reconsideration of Ratings. OpDiv/StaffDivs must develop internal procedures for applicants to request an appeal or reconsideration of ratings , in accordance with the DEOH, Chapter 5, Section C, Appeal of Rating: