
OpDivs/StaffDivs' DE SOP must address the use of these options. When one or more of the limitations are used, they must be stated in the JOA, advertisement, or notice and justification (to limit apps) must be documented in the DE case file.
Applicant Notification. Applicants who apply through USAJOBS must receive notification through USAJOBS at each of the following four points during the application process: 1) application received; 2) application assessed for qualifications; 3) applicant referred or not referred to selecting official; and 4) applicant selected or not selected for the job (DEOH, Chapter 4).
Readvertisement of Vacancy Announcements. When announcements are re-advertised within 60 days of the closing date of the original announcement, all applicants who applied to the original announcement must be notified of the readvertisement, regardless whether there are significant changes to the announcement. (Positions re-advertised after the 60 day time frame do not require applicant notification.)
Veterans' Preference Adjudication. OHROs are responsible for ensuring veterans' preference provisions are applied in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §§3309-3319, 5 CFR Part 211, the DEOH, and this Instruction. The DEOH, Chapter 4, is followed regarding reviewing incomplete applications from preference eligibles. OpDivs/StaffDivs shall request additional information from applicants when there is conflicting documentation in their application package concerning their claimed veterans' preference (Letter from the U.S. Office of Special Counsel (OSC) to HHS Office of General Counsel, 12/12/2017). For example, in cases where the applicant submits supporting evidence that shows they are entitled to the veterans' preference, but also provides contradictory evidence that shows they are not entitled to the veterans' preference they are claiming, HR Specialists must request additional information, as necessary, to ensure veterans' preference is adjudicated properly.
Application for 10-Point Veteran Preference Eligibles. OPM issued a revised Standard Form 15 (SF-15), Application for 10-Point Veteran Preference, in October 2013. Signatures are no longer required; the form is now PDF-fillable; and veterans may file for preference if they have documentation showing they are honorably discharged or will be discharged under honorable conditions within 120 days after the date the certification is signed. The SF-15 must be collected prior to appointment.
Spousal Derived Preference Claims. OPM retains authority to determine spousal derived preference when the claim for preference is based on a claim of common law marriage (5 U.S.C. §2108(3)(D); 5 CFR 211.103). OHROs submit requests to employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for review/concurrence and OPM approval.
Physical Qualification Waivers of Preference Eligibles. OHROs will waive (5 U.S.C. §3312):
Requirement(s) concerning age, height, and weight in determining qualifications of a preference eligible, unless the requirements is/are essential to the performance of the duties of the position, and
Physical requirements if, in the opinion of the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv, after considering the recommendation of an accredited physician, the preference eligible is physically able to perform the duties of the position.
If the OHRO determines that, based on a preponderance of evidence, a preference eligible under 5 U.S.C. §2108(3)(C) who has a compensable service-connected disability of 30 percent or more is not able to fulfill the physical requirements of the position, the OHRO shall submit the request to HHS OHR Policy and Accountability Division (PAD) at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for review/concurrence and OPM approval. PAD will subsequently notify OPM of the determination and, at the same time, the OHRO will notify the preference eligible of the reasons for the determination and of the right to respond to OPM within 15 days of the date of the notification. No correspondence is sent by the OHRO to the applicant until PAD concurrence is received. OPM will require evidence that notification was sent to the preference eligible's last known address and will make a final determination on the physical ability of the preference eligible to perform the duties of the position, taking into account any additional information provided. The OpDiv/StaffDiv will not select any other person for the position prior to receiving OPM's final determination.
Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP) and Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP). OpDivs/StaffDivs must provide priority selection to qualified CTAP and ICTAP candidates when filling positions under delegated examining procedures. OHROs retain written documentation to demonstrate CTAP and ICTAP clearance. (HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, and 5 CFR 330, Subparts F and G)
Reemployment Priority List (RPL). OpDivs/StaffDivs must provide priority selection to qualified HHS RPL candidates when filling positions under delegated examining procedures. OHROs retain written documentation to demonstrate RPL clearance. (HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, and 5 CFR 330, Subpart B)
Category Rating. Qualified applicants for permanent, term, and temporary positions in the competitive service are assessed using category rating procedures. Category rating is a method of evaluating candidates who meet eligibility and minimum qualification requirements for the position by assessing the applicants' experience, education, and training and placing them into pre-defined "quality categories" rather than assigning individual numerical scores. Category rating is synonymous with alternative rating described in 5 U.S.C. §3319. For additional guidance, see the DEOH, Chapter 5.
Quality Categories: The HHS quality categories are Best Qualified, Well Qualified, and Qualified. Each category represents a grouping of candidates with similar levels of job-related knowledge, skills, abilities (KSAs) or competencies. Applicants are assessed and placed into categories based on their job-related competencies/KSAs and any applicable selective placement factors.
Category Rating Procedures: OpDiv/StaffDiv category rating procedures must be documented and adhere to the following requirements:
Quality categories are Best Qualified, Well Qualified, and Qualified.
Categories cannot include a "Not Qualified" category.
Categories are defined in an OpDiv/StaffDiv's DE SOP and/or DE case file through job analysis. Definitions should be written to reflect the requirements of the position. The quality categories must be defined prior to announcing the job, and each category should have a clear definition that distinguishes it from the other categories.
Quality categories may be defined using numerical scores (i.e., a range of scores to define each quality category). For example, scores of 95-100 to represent the "Best-Qualified" category, scores of 85-94 are "Well Qualified," and scores of 70-84 are "Qualified." Such rating criteria must adhere to the technical standards in the Uniform Guidelines (29 CFR Part 1607) and the Job Analysis and Assessments guidance in this Instruction to ensure it complies with merit staffing laws and regulations (DEOH, Chapter 5).
Each quality category definition must be included in the vacancy announcement, along with a description of how veterans' preference is applied under category rating procedures.
A numerical ranking process, or the "rule of three," does not apply to category rating.
