
Public Notice. A legal requirement to post all job opportunity announcements (JOA) on USAJOBS when accepting applications from outside the federal workforce for competitive service positions lasting more than 120 days (5 U.S.C. §§ 3327 and 3330).
Subject Matter Expert (SME). An individual who is an expert of the job to be filled. A SME is typically an incumbent in the same position or first level supervisor (but cannot be the selecting official or hiring manager to maintain objectivity in the hiring process) and has knowledge of the competencies needed to perform the position and is asked to assist HR in the assessment process, i.e., development of the job analysis, applicant assessment, and/or interviews.
Variation. OPM is authorized by 5 CFR §5.1 to approve a variation (i.e., an exception to regulation) to avoid unnecessary hardship to an employee (i.e., loss of employment, pay, grade, or significant service credit) when an agency makes a regulatory error during the competitive hiring process. OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Offices must first attempt to correct the erroneous appointment by placing the employee on a legal appointment (e.g., by determining if the employee could have been properly appointed at the time when the error was made via a previously advertised position; posting a JOA; or appointing via a noncompetitive appointment authority, etc.). OPM does not have the authority to make exceptions to law, Executive Order, or court decision. For additional guidance, see DEOH, Chapter 6, Section E, and Erroneous Certification and Priority Consideration in this Instruction.
Veteran. Defined under 5 U.S.C. §2108(1-2) and 5 CFR §211.102.
1104-1-40 Responsibilities
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA),Office of Human Resources (HHS OHR):
Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding delegated examining, including the acceptance of applications; category rating procedures; veterans' preference adjudication; and requests requiring OPM approval, consistent with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Serves as the liaison with OPM on matters pertaining to delegated examining for the Department.
Submits to OPM any pass over and objection request that requires OPM approval.
Submits to OPM any request for variation.
Submits to OPM requests for final determination of the physical ability of a preference eligible to perform the duties of a position.
Submits to OPM requests for a HHS-wide or OpDiv/StaffDiv-specific direct hire authority.
Periodically reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv delegated examining procedures, actions, qualification standards, and reports to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations; and
Takes corrective action, as required by OPM, as the result of the review of delegated examining activities within HHS (5 U.S.C. §1104).
OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Offices (OHROs):
Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Maintain programmatic responsibility for the delegated examining process within their organization.
Ensure that all human resources (HR) staff, including contractors, performing delegated examining activities have successfully completed the initial OPM delegated examining training and are currently certified to perform delegated examining.
Ensure that managers, supervisors and personnel involved in the competitive hiring process are trained and informed of merit systems principles and prohibited personnel practices.
Establish internal Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for delegated examining activities, including category rating procedures, consistent with applicable law, regulations, the DEOH, and this Instruction.
Fill vacant positions with the best qualified persons from a sufficient pool of diverse, well-qualified applicants.
Submit to HHS OHR Policy and Accountability Division (PAD) any requests to object/pass over a veteran with a 30% or more compensable service-connected disability for OPM approval.
Submit to PAD OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Director (HRD) objection/pass over approvals of preference eligibles with less than 30% compensable service-connected disability, or an applicant with derived preference, within 14 calendar days of HRD approval, along with the supporting documentation listed in Section 1104-1-50, Pass Overs and Objections of Preference Eligibles of this Instruction.
Audit every certificate of eligibles even when no selections are made and/or the certificate is canceled.
Submit to PAD any variation requests for OPM approval, after attempts to regularize (i.e., correct) the appointment are unsuccessful.
Submit to PAD any requests for OpDiv/StaffDiv-specific direct hire authorities for OPM approval.
Ensure that the restrictions on movement after competitive appointment (5 CFR 330, Subpart E) are followed.
Within five (5) business days of the addition, termination, or suspension of any DE office(s), notify PAD so OHR can notify OPM, as required by HHS-1.
Human Resources Staff Performing Delegated Examining Activities:
Obtain and maintain current certification under the OPM's Delegated Examining Certification Program.
Conduct delegated examining consistent with law, federal regulations, the DEOH, and this Instruction.
Work with hiring officials to develop job analyses and assessment tools prior to posting the JOA. Ensure that each job analysis is signed and dated by the hiring official and HR Specialist.
Ensure that qualification determinations for each applicant are in accordance with the appropriate OPM qualification standard.
Appropriately apply and adjudicate veterans' preference.