1104-1-50 Policy
OPM DE Certification. All individuals responsible for conducting DE activities (i.e. an employee or contractor who performs delegated examining activities to fill competitive service positions, including conducting job analysis; public notice; accepting and processing applications; candidate assessment and referral; adjudicating veterans' preference; auditing certificates; delegated examining unit accountability responsibilities; and reporting requirements) are required to complete initial certification training and be currently certified to perform delegated examining. Individuals must successfully pass the OPM DE Certification Assessment, in accordance with the OPM Delegated Examining Certification Program Guide. Certifications are valid for three (3) years. Recertification Assessments may be taken when DE certifications are within six (6) months of expiring. Individuals must be actively conducting delegated examining activities, or be in a policy or oversight role to delegated examining, to be eligible for recertification. Failure to maintain current DE certification can jeopardize an OpDiv/StaffDiv's authority to conduct DE activities under HHS-1. For additional information, including assessment preparation, recertification, costs, etc., see the OPM Delegated Examining Certification Program Guide - PDF.
Employee Conflict of Interest. When an employee, a Subject Matter Expert (SME), an employee's relative as defined by 5 U.S.C. §3110(a)(3), or a member of an employee's household applies for a position that is being handled by the employee/SME's office, neither the employee or SME may be involved in the assessment or certification process for that position. Each OHRO conducting DE activities under HHS-1 must include this guidance in its DE SOP. At a minimum, the SOP should state that an employee must provide written notice to the servicing Human Resources Office when:
The employee or SME intends to apply for a position that is being handled by the DE unit/office in which they work, or
The employee knows that a relative or a member of his or her household intends to apply for such a position.
Job Analysis & Assessments.
Job Analysis.
A job analysis identifies job-related competencies/knowledge, skills and abilities (KSAs) and demonstrates a clear relationship between the tasks performed on the job and the competencies/KSAs required to successfully perform the tasks. The job analysis must be signed and dated by the selecting official and HR Specialist.
Job analyses for multi-grade level announcements: There should be an approved job analysis for each grade level that distinguishes the differences in job duties and job-related competencies between grade levels. In cases where a Statement of Difference(s) is used, a single job analysis may be used.
Job Assessments.
OpDivs/StaffDivs must utilize valid (i.e., job related) assessment methods to evaluate applicants in accordance with the requirements in 5 CFR Part 300, Subpart A; the DEOH, Chapter 2, Section C; and consistent with the technical standards in the Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection Procedures (29 CFR Part 1607). Assessment questions must be based on reliable rating criteria that are fully documented by the appropriate job analysis and show a direct link to the competencies required for successful performance. Assessment tools must be job-related and should be reviewed by an Industrial Organizational (I/O) Psychologist or legal counsel prior to use to ensure they meet regulatory requirements and are a legally supportable evaluation tool. For additional guidance, see the DEOH, Chapter 2, Section C.
Administrative Careers With America (ACWA): OHROs are not required to use OPM's ACWA assessment tools for ACWA designated positions; however, they are available to fill positions covered by ACWA. See the DEOH, Chapter 2, for instructions and DEOH Appendix F, for the list of ACWA positions. Other valid assessment tool(s) may be used when filling these competitive service positions as long as they comply with the assessment requirements described above in this Instruction.
Citizenship Requirement. No individual may be appointed to a position in the competitive service unless the individual is a citizen or national of the United States, except in rare cases when approved by OPM (8 U.S.C. §1408; 5 CFR §7.3; 5 CFR §338.101; and Executive Order 11935). In addition, HHS, along with many other federal agencies receiving appropriated funds, is restricted from compensating an individual who is not a U.S. Citizen or national of the United States for any federal position. OHROs should consult their legal counsel to identify and comply with agency specific appropriations restrictions related to the hiring of individuals who are not citizens. For more information see DEOH, Chapter 4.

Acceptance of Applications.
Applications for competitive service positions are accepted according to the application procedures defined in the public notice (5 U.S.C. §§3327 and 3330, 5 CFR Part 330, Subpart A; and the DEOH, Chapter 4).
If the applicant is a 10-point preference eligible, then the applicant may file an application at any time for any position for which: a) a register is about to be established; b) a non-temporary appointment has been made in the preceding three years; or c) a list of eligibles currently exists but is closed to new applicants (5 CFR Part 332).
If the applicant is a preference eligible, the applicant is: a) entitled to be entered on an existing competitor inventory if he or she applies within 90 days after furlough or separation without delinquency or misconduct from a career or career-conditional appointment, provided he or she is otherwise qualified for the position; b) may enter an existing inventory if he or she has successfully appealed a furlough or discharge from a career or career-conditional appointment, and is otherwise qualified for the position; and c) entitled to be re-entered on each existing inventory (or its successor) on which he or she was previously listed, provided he or she applies within 90 days after resignation without delinquency or misconduct from a career or career-conditional appointment (5 CFR Part 332 ). For more information, see the DEOH, Chapter 4.
Limiting the Number of Applicants. OpDivs/StaffDivs may use the following options to manage application volume for positions that attract a high number of applicants:
Limiting the number of days a JOA is open: OpDivs/StaffDivs have the discretion to determine the length of time that a JOA is open; however, justifications for announcements open less than five (5) calendar days must be documented in the DE case file, in accordance with HHS-1 and the DEOH, Chapter 3. Justifications are based on the number, type(s), grade levels, and geographic locations of the positions being filled; labor market conditions; and recent experience (within 1 year) filling similar positions.
Limiting the number of applications received: OpDivs/StaffDivs have the discretion to set "cut-offs" or limits (e.g., the first 100 applications received) on the number of applications that they will consider when filling a position. When using such limits, OpDivs/StaffDivs shall accept any applications received up until 11:59 p.m. on the day the limit is reached in order to accommodate applicants in non-Eastern time zones.
