
Applicant Responsibilities:
The applicant's request must be made in writing and indicate why the applicant believes the original decision is inaccurate.
Upon receipt of the OHRO's decision, the applicant may submit a second level appeal to a designated official within the OHRO. (The result of the second level appeal is final. The applicant may not appeal to OPM.)
OpDiv/StaffDiv Responsibilities:
Make its internal appeal procedures available to applicants who wish to challenge an assigned rating, and advise the applicant that the results of the appeal could result in a higher, lower, or same score.
The OHRO that made the original decision conducts the review.
A DE certified staff member other than the person who made the original decision must conduct the review.
Reply in writing to the applicant's request with a full explanation of the reasons for the decision, without compromising the rating schedule.
Follow the guidance in the DEOH, Chapter 5, and this Instruction (see Erroneous Certification and Priority Consideration below, if applicable) when the review results in a changed rating.
Auditing Certificates. This important accountability process certifies the action taken by hiring managers on returned certificates of eligibles, and ensures compliance with Department policy, as well as legal and regulatory merit staffing procedures. Certificates must be audited prior to the selectee's entrance-on-duty date by another DE-certified HR Specialist and must comply with this Instruction and DEOH, Chapter 6, Section C. In cases where the vacancy announcement has been canceled but a certificate was issued, the certificate must still be audited. Certificates must be annotated to reflect selections, and declinations or any failed to reply actions. Acceptable documentation from the hiring manager can be in the form of a signature on the actual certificate; an email; an electronic certificate; or a manager's statement on the system-generated email to the servicing HR Specialist. All declinations and withdrawals from consideration must be documented in the DE case file or in USAStaffing.
Erroneous Certification and Priority Consideration. In the event an OHRO discovers an error that resulted in a selection in violation of the selection rules, corrective action must be taken to resolve the error. The instructions in the DEOH, Chapter 6, Section E, are followed to determine if applicants lost consideration and to correct (regularize) any erroneous appointments. The OHRO who made the error must give priority consideration for future vacancies within their OpDiv/StaffDiv to all applicants who lost consideration due to an illegal selection. When a violation of law or an illegal appointment is identified, OHROs must immediately notify the HHS OHR Policy and Accountability Division (PAD). Variation request(s) to provide service credit for the period incumbent(s) were on an illegal appointment, or to retain incumbent(s) appointed erroneously, must be submitted to PAD for review/concurrence and OPM approval.
1104-1-60 Documentation and Accountability
Records associated with hiring actions must be retained in individual recruitment case files, or USAStaffing, to allow for third-party reconstruction. Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the DEOH's Records Retention and Disposition Schedule - PDF (DEOH, Appendix C). Generally, records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed.
HHS OHR Policy and Accountability Division (PAD) or OPM will conduct annual accountability reviews to ensure compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations. Audits will be conducted by DE certified staff external to the OpDiv/StaffDiv, in accordance with the requirements described in HHS-1 and the DEOH.