
Material Transmitted:

HHS Instruction 293-3, Employee Performance File System Records

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 293-3 (all)

Background:
This Instruction has been revised consistent with recent changes in the organization of HHS, and in support of HHS administrative initiatives calling for more streamlined rules and greater delegations of authority.

This issuance streamlines the rules and updates the Instruction's contents. 

Any reference to "OPDIV" in this Instruction now includes AHCPR, ATSDR, CDC, FDA, HRSA, IHS, NIH, SAMHSA, the Office of the Secretary, the Program Support Center, HCFA, ACF, and AOA.

This issuance is effective immediately. Implementation under this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws and bargaining agreements.

Filing Instructions:
Remove superseded material and file new material. Post receipt of this transmittal to the HHS Check List of Transmittals and file this transmittal in sequential order after the check list.





                                   Eugene Kinlow
                                   Deputy Assistant Secretary for
                                   Human Resources, OASMB
INSTRUCTION 293-3  
 
HHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 293-3
EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE FILE (EPF) SYSTEM RECORDS

293-3-00  Purpose
      10  References
      20  Coverage
      30  Departmental Requirements
      40  Privacy and Freedom of Information Act Considerations
      50  Access to the EPF Record System
      60  Disposition Requirements

      Exhibit 293-3-A, Access to Employee Performance File System Records 

293-3-00 PURPOSE

This Instruction states the policies and requirements of this Department relative to the establishment, maintenance, retention, disposal, and safeguarding of EPF system records.

293-3-10 REFERENCES

A.  5 U.S. Code 552a (law - Privacy Act - records maintained on individuals)
B.  5 CFR, Part 293 (regulations - personnel records)
C.  5 CFR, Part 294 (regulations - availability of official information)
D.  5 CFR, Part 297 (regulations - privacy procedures for personnel records)
E.  5 CFR, Part 430.209 (regulations - disposition of records)
F.  45 CFR, Part 5b (regulations - HHS Privacy Act regulations)
G.  The Guide for Personnel Recordkeeping (Office of Personnel Management (OPM) Operating Manual, dated November 30, 1994, and March 15, 1996)
H.  HHS Personnel Instruction 293-1 (personnel and equal employment records disposal)
I.  HHS Personnel Instruction 297-1 (protection of privacy in personnel records systems)
J.	HHS Performance Management Plan (dated April 26, 1993)
K.	HHS Personnel Instruction 430-6 (performance management for members of the senior executive service)
L.  HHS Personnel Instruction 430-7 (performance appraisal system)

293-3-20 COVERAGE

This Instruction applies to all employees of this Department, regardless of pay plan, grade, or occupational group, except Commissioned Corps officers and Senior Biomedical Research Service members

293-3-30 DEPARTMENTAL REQUIREMENTS

A.  Each personnel office must establish an EPF record system for each employee for whom it maintains an Official Personnel Folder (OPF), including members of the Senior Executive Service (SES).  These records may be maintained either in an envelope kept in the employee's OPF or in a separate file maintained in either the personnel office or other office as authorized by regulation.

B.  The EPF system established for non-SES employees must contain the following records or any other supporting documents for the period indicated:

                     Record 				    Retention Period

    1.  Annual rating of record issued under a 		4 years
        performance appraisal program within the
        HHS performance appraisal system.

    2.  After the final appraisal is issued, any 		4 years
        form which identifies job elements and
        the standards for those elements, with
        any changes thereto, including appraisal
        information on those elements, if recorded.

C.  The EPF system established for SES members must contain the following records or any other supporting documents for the period indicated:


                   Record 				    Retention Period

    1.  Annual rating of record issued under			5 years
        an SES appraisal system.

    2.  After the final rating of record is issued, 	5 years
        any SES performance appraisal form which 
        identifies job elements and standards for 
        those elements, with any changes thereto, 
        including appraisal information on those
        elements, if recorded.

    3.  Documented progress reviews and narrative 	5 years
        description of performance. 

    4.  Any supporting documentation for a particu- 	5 years
        lar evaluation that is submitted with the
        performance appraisal form (including 
        written statements of the employee).
 
    5.  Records pertaining to SES appraisals 		5 years
        which support recommendations made by
        Performance Review Boards.

    6.  Any form or other document regarding 		5 years
        performance-related decisions or recommen-
        dations of an Executive Resources Board.

    7.  Any form or other document used to 			5 years
        recommend an individual for Meritorious
        or Distinguished Executive Rank and records
        supporting the recommendation.
