Instruction 300-3: Detail and Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) Assignments
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 300-3, Details and Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) Assignments, dated 01/18/2023.

HHS-69, Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) Agreement, dated 01/2023

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) Assignments, dated 07/22/2022

Background:
This policy updates HHS OpDiv/StaffDiv ethics responsibilities for details and IPA assignments and establishes a requirement to use form HHS-69, IPA Agreement (2023 or later), for all IPA assignments, extensions, or modifications to ensure IPA assignments meet federal laws and regulations, including the ethics and conflict of interest statutes and regulations.

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out by OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, collective bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

Dr. Kimberly A. Steide

W. Robert Leavitt
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources Chief Human Capital Officer

300-3-00 SECTIONS
300-3-10 Purpose
300-3-20 Coverage and Exclusions
300-3-30 References
300-3-40 Definitions
300-3-50 Responsibilities
300-3-60 Employee Details
300-3-70 Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) Assignments
300-3-80 Reimbursable and Non-reimbursable Agreements
300-3-90 Documentation and Accountability

300-3-10 Purpose
This Instruction implements the Department of Health and Human Services (Department or HHS) policy on employee details and Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) assignments.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

300-3-20 Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage. This Instruction covers employees defined under 5 U.S.C. §2105, except for those excluded below or otherwise excluded by the rules governing details and IPAs.
Exclusions.
Officers in the uniformed service of the U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corp (42 U.S.C. §204, et seq.)
Political appointees are ineligible to serve on IPAs (i.e., Presidential Appointees with Senate confirmation (PAS), Presidential Appointees without Senate confirmation (PA), Non-career Senior Executive Service (NCSES), and Schedule C).
PAS and PA appointees are ineligible to serve on details. (NCSES and Schedule C details are covered under Section 300-3-60.)
Employees of non-federal organizations who are assigned to HHS under contractual agreements, i.e., contractors.
The provisions of this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71,  and such actions require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees. When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
300-3-30 References
2 United States Code (U.S.C.) §4301(i), Committee Staffs 
3 U.S.C. §112, Details of Employees of Executive Departments 
5 U.S.C. §7106, Management Rights 
5 U.S.C. §2105, Employee 
5 U.S.C. §3341, Details within Executive or Military Departments 
5 U.S.C. §3343, Details to International Organizations 
5 U.S.C. §3344, Details, Administrative Law Judges 
5 U.S.C. §§3371-3376, Assignments To and From States  (IPA)
31 U.S.C. §1301, Application (of appropriations) (i.e., the Purpose Statute) 
31 U.S.C. §1535, Agency Agreements (i.e., the Economy Act) 
31 U.S.C. §1536, Crediting Payments Between Executive Agencies  (i.e., the Economy Act)
42 U.S.C. §215, Detail of Public Health Service Personnel 
5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) §6.5, Assignment of Excepted Service Employees
5 CFR Part 300, Subpart C, Detail of Employees
5 CFR §317.903, Senior Executive Service (SES) Details
5 CFR Part 334, Intergovernmental Personnel Act
5 CFR §335.103, Agency Promotion Programs
5 CFR §§352.301-306 and 314, Detail of Employees to International Organizations
Detail of Law Enforcement Agents to Congressional Committees, 12 Op. Office of Legal Counsel (O.L.C.) 184, 1988 WL 391014 (Sept. 13, 1988) (employee details to the Legislative Branch)
Reimbursement of the Internal Revenue Service for Investigative Services Provided to the Independent Counsel, 12 Op. O.L.C. 233, 1988 WL 391018 (Sept. 30 , 1988); see also Reimbursement for Detail of JAG Corps Personnel to US Attorney’s Office, 13 Op. O.L.C. 188, 1989 WL 595823 (June 27, 1989) (reimbursement for details)
OPM SES Desk Guide - PDF (details)
HHS Financial Management Directives and Guidance (interagency agreements)
HHS Travel Policy (payment of travel and transportation expenses)
Memo from HHS Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources, Delegation of Human Resources Authorities, dated May 9, 2022.
300-3-40 Definitions
Agency. An Executive Department or Agency, as defined in 5 U.S.C. §§101 and 105 (i.e., HHS).
Days. Calendar days.
Detail. A temporary assignment to a different position for a specified period. A federal employee who is on detail continues to occupy their official position of record while on detail and continues to receive pay and federal benefits associated with their permanent position. At the expiration of a detail, federal employees return to their official position of record. See Section 300-3-60.
IPA. The Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) allows for the temporary assignment via a detail or temporary appointment of personnel between the federal government and state and local governments, colleges and universities, Indian tribal governments, federally funded research and development centers, and other eligible organizations defined in 5 U.S.C. §3371 and 5 CFR Part 334. At the end of an IPA assignment, federal employees return to their official position of record or are reassigned to a position of like pay and grade (5 CFR §334.107(b)). See Section 300-3-70.
Public Health Service (PHS). A part of HHS focused on protecting, promoting and advancing public health and safety. The Assistant Secretary of Health (ASH) oversees the PHS, including the Commissioned Corps (not covered by this Instruction). Ten (10) HHS Operating Divisions/Staff Divisions (OpDivs/StaffDivs, or Divisions) are PHS components:
Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response (ASPR);
Office of Global Affairs (OGA);
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ);
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR);
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC);
Food and Drug Administration (FDA);
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA);
Indian Health Service (IHS);
National Institutes of Health (NIH); and
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).
300-3-50 Responsibilities
Immediate Office of the Secretary (IOS). HHS’ White House Liaison initiates details of Non- career SES and Schedule C political employees with OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers, adhering to the detail rules covered in this policy (Section 300-3-60).
Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Establishes Department-wide HR policy and guidance consistent with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Submits for OPM approval requests to detail an excepted service employee to a competitive service position.
Submits for OPM approval requests for SES details exceeding 240 days if the detail is for either: a) A non-SES employee to an SES position that supervises other SES positions; or b) An SES employee to a position at the GS-15 or equivalent level or below.
Approves requests for details and extension of details to the White House and Congressional Committees, with the concurrence by the Assistant Secretary for Legislation, prior to the start date.
Submits for OPM approval a request of a federal employee to participate in the IPA program more than a total of six (6) years during their federal career.
Periodically reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv details and IPA assignments to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Assistant Secretary for Legislation (ASL):
Reviews and gives concurrence/non-concurrence on detail and extension requests to Congressional Committees.
Notifies the Congressional Committee Chairman by letter of detail approvals.
