
300-2-50: Requirements
A.  OpDivs/StaffDivs must adhere to the requirements in this section when filling competitive service positions via Merit Promotion Procedures (for vacancies open HHS-wide or broader); a government-wide or HHS-specific DHA covering more than one (1) OpDiv/StaffDiv; or when filling positions via a non-competitive appointment, specifically transfers from another Federal agency, reinstatement, or reemployed annuitant.  Certificates issued to fill permanent or temporary positions via these hiring authorities must be shared upon request.

B.   The following language must be included in each JOA:  "Additional selections may be made for similar positions  across the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) within the local commuting area(s) of the location identified in this announcement. By applying, you agree to have your application shared with interested selecting official(s) at HHS. Clearance of CTAP/ICTAP will be applied for similar positions  across HHS."

C.    In addition to above, the following requirements must be met in order to make a selection(s) from a HHS shared certificate:

      1. The JOA must be open:

            a. HHS-wide or all federal employees for Merit Promotion;

            b. To the general public for DHA; or

            c. To either all federal employees or the general public for transfers.

      2. The certificate must be active;

      3. The position must be in the same series (see B.15 for interdisciplinary positions);

      4. The position must be at the same grade level and full performance level (FPL);

      5. The position type is the same (permanent or nonpermanent);

      6. The position has the same work schedule (full-time, part-time, etc.), but does not have to be the same tour of duty;

      7. The position must have the same selective factors, if applicable;

      8. The position must have the same testing requirements;

      9. The major duties of the position are the same or similar;

      10. The position must have comparable specialized experience requirements;

      11. The position must have comparable knowledge, skills, and abilities as reflected in the job analysis and standard assessment questions;

      12. The position must be in the same duty location:

            a. The Metropolitan area of Washington, DC is defined as the District of Columbia; Alexandria, Fairfax, and Falls Church Cities, VA.; Arlington, Fairfax, Loudoun, and Prince William Counties, VA.; and Charles, Montgomery, and Prince Georges Counties, MD (5 CFR ยง210.102);

            b. For all other areas, duty location is defined as the local commuting area (i.e., the geographic area that is usually considered one area for employment purposes; any population center (or two or more neighboring ones) and surrounding localities in which employees live and can be reasonably expected to travel back and forth daily to their place of employment (5 CFR ยง351.203 and HHS Instruction 330-2, CTAP);

      13. The JOA includes the HHS definition of 'Well Qualified,' the HHS CTAP/ICTAP clearance statement, and the proof of eligibility documents required for CTAP/ICTAP application, as required by HHS Instruction 330-2, CTAP (5 CFR ยง330.104); and

      14. An officially classified position description (PD) must be used to advertise and fill the position. OpDiv/StaffDiv's must adhere to the classification principles, and may not intentionally modify a position description to meet the requirements in this Instruction for the purposes of sharing or using a shared certificate. Use of a shared certificate may not be appropriate in all cases. If based on the review of the position, the receiving OHRO's position has different specialized experience requirements or critical competencies/KSAs than the original agency's position, then using a shared certificate is not appropriate.

      15. If the announced position was interdisciplinary, a vacancy filled from the announcement must also be an interdisciplinary position of the same series            combinations.

D.    To offer Physician Comparability Allowances (PCA), or Title 38 pay, it must be stated in the announcement.  All other incentives do not have to be included in the announcement unless required by the OHRO's internal procedures.

E.   If an announcement explicitly states that an incentive or flexibility (e.g., Student Loan Repayment, Creditable Service for Annual Leave Accrual) will not be offered, then that incentive may not be offered to any selectee from the announcement.

F.    Any job requirements or flexibilities not listed above and not stated in the original announcement that differ from the position being filled must be communicated to the candidate no later than the tentative job offer so the candidate can make an informed decision to accept or decline the position. This includes financial disclosure reporting, inclusion in a bargaining unit, an increased security clearance or background investigation, Emergency Tier designation, paid relocation, required travel, atypical tour of duty (e.g., early mornings, night hours, weekends, split schedules), drug testing/screening, or any other job requirement or flexibility that differs from the requirements or flexibilities in the original announcement.

G.   Certificates covered by this Instruction are open for 240 calendar days, with no extensions. OHROs must make certificates available for sharing after forty (40) calendar days from the certificate issuance date.

H.   The Originating OHRO must clear the CTAP, ICTAP, and RPL programs, as applicable, at initial announcement, in accordance with HHS Instruction 330-2, CTAP.

I.   OpDivs/StaffDivs may use an HHS certificate that meets the requirements in this section to fill positions via a non-competitive appointment, specifically transfers from another Federal agency, reinstatement, or reemployed annuitant.  (5 CFR ยง315, Subpart E, is followed to determine tenure and acquisition of competitive status upon transfer.)  When a shared certificate is open for greater than 120 days, the Receiving OHRO must re-clear CTAP, ICTAP, and RPL before filling an HHS position via a non-competitive appointment:

      1. The Receiving OHRO posts a JOA, identical to the original JOA, open to CTAP/ICTAP candidates for five (5) calendar days at a minimum, to re-clear CTAP/ICTAP;

      2. The Receiving OHRO checks the HHS RP Lfor  the local commuting area of the duty location listed in the original JOA;

      3. If any qualified CTAP/ICTAP candidates apply, or qualified RPL candidates are found, those candidates must receive priority consideration before other candidates, in accordance with HHS Instruction 330-2, CTAP.

J.     Receiving OHROs may not object to an applicant's qualifications or eligibility unless the applicant provides new documentation or information that contradicts or conflicts with the original rating.  Receiving OHROs are required to notify the Originating OHRO to provide the new documentation or information. The Originating OHRO will then make the determination on the appropriate course of action based on the new documentation or information.

K.   Candidates will remain referred for consideration while the certificate is open for 240 calendar days provided they are still eligible, unless the candidate requests to withdraw from continued consideration.  This is to ensure applicants have the ability to compete for all vacant positions that may be filled through the JOA.

300-2-60: Operational Guidance
See HHS Shared Certificates Guidance, OHR-01-2020, on HR Policy Library.

300-2-70: Documentation and Accountability
A.  Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule. Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, etc. or if the time limits associated with grievance processes have passed (e.g., before the anniversary date).

         B.  HHS OHR will conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.