
Non-federal employees detailed to unclassified duties continue to be paid directly by their non-federal organization at a rate of pay based on the individual’s non-federal job.
Non-federal employees detailed under IPA may supervise a project and perform certain team lead duties (e.g., set due dates, identify resources, track progress and the completion of work, etc.,); however, they cannot perform supervisory or team lead functions that impact an employee (e.g., assign roles, participate in performance reviews, recommend awards, take disciplinary action, approve/disapprove leave requests or personnel actions, etc.). In addition, non-federal employees cannot perform the inherently governmental functions as discussed in Public Law 105-270, Section 5, and Office of Federal Procurement Policy Letter 11-01, Performance and Management of Inherently Governmental and Critical Functions, (76 FR 56227-01) (Sept. 12, 2011), including but not limited to serving as a manager or supervisor; implementing or administering grants, contracts, policies; directly exerting control over appropriated funds; or signing personnel actions.
Detailees generally have the same workweek and hours of duty as federal employees in the OpDiv/StaffDiv to which they are assigned unless the workweek of the permanent employees is shorter than the federal workweek by law or local ordinance. Detailees are eligible to telework and participate in alternate work schedule arrangements of the OpDiv/StaffDiv, consistent with HHS Instruction 990-1, Workplace Flexibilities.
Non-federal employees detailed to HHS can receive recognition through letters of appreciation or commendation but are not eligible for incentive awards (5 U.S.C. Chapter 45) or Quality Step Increases (QSI).
Temporary Excepted Service Appointment
Non-federal employees who are placed on a temporary excepted appointment are considered temporary federal employees for the duration of the appointment and must meet the OPM qualification requirements for the series and grade of the position they are appointed to.
Typically, a non-federal employee is appointed at the minimum rate of the grade being filled; however, if an OpDiv/StaffDiv wants to pay an advanced step rate for a position at GS-11 through GS-15 based on superior qualifications, it may do so in accordance with HHS Instruction 531-1, Setting Pay Based on Superior Qualifications or Special Needs.
Non-federal employees who are placed on temporary appointments are entitled to cost- of-living allowances and other pay differentials (5 CFR Part 550); are eligible for incentive awards (5 U.S.C. Chapter 45); and earn leave in the same manner as other federal employees.
Eligibility for within-grade increases (WGI) is dependent on the length of appointment; however, employees appointed to successive temporary appointments of one (1) year or less are not eligible for a WGI, even if the time under successive temporary appointments exceeds one (1) year.
Non-federal employees appointed to a temporary appointment are not eligible to enroll in the Federal Employees Health Benefits program unless their federal appointment results in the loss of coverage under the non-federal health benefits system (5 U.S.C. §3374).
Non-federal employees placed on temporary appointments under IPA are not covered by any retirement system for federal employees, or by the Federal Employee Group Life Insurance Program.
A non-federal employee placed on a temporary excepted service appointment under IPA may supervise HHS employees.
Consult 5 U.S.C. §3374 for information on compensation for personal injury while on duty; death benefits; and for instances where a state or local government fails to continue employer contributions to retirement or benefit plans.
Citizenship Requirement. The Consolidated Appropriations Act (i.e., the annual federal budget) prohibits federal agencies from compensating individuals who are not U.S. citizens or nationals for any federal position within the U.S., unless the agency has a statutory exemption to the ban. HHS does not have an exemption to compensate non-U.S. citizens in temporary appointments under IPA. OpDivs/StaffDivs who are considering appointing a non-U.S. citizen without pay to a temporary excepted service appointment under IPA or detailing a non-U.S. citizen to a federal position under IPA should consult the Office of the General Counsel prior to the effective date of the IPA assignment to ensure the action and any related payments are legally supportable with the Appropriations Act.
Required IPA Agreement.
Prior to the effective date of an IPA assignment, the assigned employee and the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv, the State or local government, Indian tribal government, institution of higher education, or other eligible organization must sign an IPA agreement listing the conditions and obligations of both parties (5 CFR §334.106).
If the IPA assignment is reimbursable, a finance agreement must also be completed following the requirements in Section 300-3-80 of this policy.
Form HHS-69, IPA Agreement (2023 or later), - PDF must be completed for all HHS IPA assignments, extensions, or modifications. The form contains the information required by OPM for IPA assignments and by the HHS Designated Agency Ethics Official to ensure proposed assignments will not violate conflict of interest statutes. HHS-69 can be found on HHS Intranet Forms and must be completed and signed by all parties listed on the form prior to the effective date of the IPA assignment.
IPA agreements must be modified if there are significant changes to the agreement during the assignment (e.g., changes to employee's duties, responsibilities, salary, work assignment location, supervisory relationships, etc.). The servicing Deputy Ethics Counselor (DEC) or Ethics Coordinator (EC) must be consulted prior to implementing changes to the duties and responsibilities of an IPA assignment to ensure there are no conflicts of interest. A list of DECs and ECs can be found at https://www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/ogc/contact-ogc/agency-deputy- ethics-counselors-and-ethics-coordinators/index.html.
Federal employees participating on an IPA assignment must agree to serve at HHS upon completion of the assignment for a period equal to the length of the IPA assignment. Employees are required to reimburse their employing OpDiv/StaffDiv for the cost of the assignment (not including salary and benefits) if the employee does not fulfill this agreement. The OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee may waive this reimbursement requirement and reason(s) must be documented. (5 U.S.C. §3372 and 5 CFR §334.105)
All individuals on an IPA assignment, whether assigned to HHS or to a non-federal organization, are subject to applicable ethics statutes and regulations including: 18 U.S.C. §§ 201-227  – Criminal Conflicts of Interest; 5 U.S.C. app.  – Ethics in Government Act of 1978; 5 U.S.C. §§ 7321-7326  and 5 C.F.R. Part 734 – Hatch Act and implementing Political Activities Regulation; 5 U.S.C. § 7342  – Foreign Gifts and Decorations Act; 5 U.S.C. § 7353  – Gifts to Federal Employees; 41 U.S.C. §§ 2101-2107  – Ethics provisions of the Procurement Integrity Act; 5 C.F.R. Part 735 – Employee Responsibilities and Conduct; 5 C.F.R. Part 2634 – Executive Branch Financial Disclosure and Related Requirements; 5 C.F.R. Part 2635 – Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch; 5 C.F.R. Part  5501 – HHS Supplemental Standards of Ethical Conduct; and 5 C.F.R. Part 5502 – HHS Supplemental Financial Disclosure Reporting Requirements. IPA assignees are responsible for notifying their employing OpDiv/StaffDiv of any additional Government work they are engaged in or become engaged in during the assignment (e.g., detail with another federal agency, service on a federal advisory committee (FACA), volunteer work at another federal agency, etc.), and for obtaining any requisite approvals or waivers before engaging in such additional work. The servicing ethics office of the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv is responsible for communicating these requirements to the IPA assignee. (This information is covered on form HHS-69, IPA Agreement. - PDF)