
Only a Career SES employee or a career-type non-SES employee (i.e., a Competitive or Excepted Service employee in Tenure Group 1 or 2, see OPM.gov/Data Standards/Tenure for definitions) may be detailed to an SES Career Reserved position.
A Non-career SES (NCSES) employee cannot be detailed to a competitive service position.
SES Limited Employees. In addition to the above SES rules:
An SES Limited Term employee can be detailed to a different SES General position if the duties of the SES General position will expire at the end of three (3) years or less;
An SES Limited Emergency employee may be detailed to a different SES General position to meet an urgent, unanticipated bona-fide need; and
SES Limited employees cannot be detailed to a position that does not meet the same conditions that supported OPM’s approval of the SES Limited Term or SES Limited Emergency allocation. This does not prevent temporary ‘acting’ assignments, i.e., the short-term absence of another executive. (OPM SES Desk Guide)
Administrative Law Judges may be detailed in accordance with the rules described under 5 U.S.C. §3344 and 5 CFR §930.207.
Details to External Organizations
To Other Agencies (31 U.S.C. §1535), see Section 300-3-40 for definition of agency.
Details to other agencies must be reimbursable with few exceptions. For additional information, see Section 300-3-80, Reimbursable and Non-reimbursable Agreements.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee may detail an employee to another federal agency with the agreement of the Secretary or organization head of the other agency when the detail supports the U.S. Government and appropriated funds are available.
Time Limits.
Competitive and excepted service employees:

a) Details to the same or lower grade may be made for up to 180 days and can be extended for periods that meet the organizational needs of both the gaining and lending agencies.

b) Details to a higher-graded position, or to a position with higher promotion potential, can be made without competition for up to 120 days. When computing the total time served on a detail, all noncompetitive details to higher-graded positions and noncompetitive time-limited promotions within the prior 12-month period count toward the 120-day total (5 CFR §335.103(c)(1)(ii)).

c) PHS employees detailed to other federal agencies via 42 U.S.C. §215 follow the rules in this Section under (C)(4) below.
SES employees: Details to a position classified at the SES-level may be made in no more than 120-day increments and can be extended for periods that meet the organizational needs of both the gaining and lending agencies. SES details are also limited by the rules described in this Section under (B)(4) above.
To International Organizations (5 U.S.C. §3343 and 5 CFR Part 352, Subpart C):
An OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee may authorize the detail of eligible employees (defined in (2)(c)) only to international organizations approved by the Department of State, with the concurrence of the Office of Global Affairs (OGA) prior to the effective date of the detail. Requests are submitted to OGA by the servicing HR Center at os-oga-hhs- globalstaffing@hhs.gov.
Eligible international organizations approved by Dept. of State for details under 5 CFR Part 352, Subpart C, are at: https://iocareers.state.gov/Main/Content/Page/approved- international-organizations. Requests to obtain Dept. of State approval for organizations not on approved list, must be submitted to OGA at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov.
Eligible Employees. All employees are eligible for international details except the employees listed under 5 CFR §352.305, i.e., a person serving on a temporary appointment; an SES employee on a non-career, limited emergency, or limited term appointment; a Presidential appointment; or a Schedule C appointment.
Time Limits.
Employees may serve on details to international organizations for up to five (5) consecutive years. The Secretary of State, upon the recommendation of the HHS Secretary, may approve an extension up to three (3) additional years if the detail extension is in the national interest. Extension requests are submitted by the HR Center to OGA at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov no later than three (3) months before the expiration of the current detail, and must include a justification why the extension request is needed; the extension request from the international organization; and the finance agreement between the OpDiv/StaffDiv and the international organization, see Section 300-3-80.
Employees cannot serve longer than a total of eight (8) years on international details (or combination of details and transfers) during their entire federal career. (Transfers to international organizations are covered by 5 CFR §§352.307-314 and HHS Instruction 301-1, Overseas Employment.)
Details to international organizations via 5 CFR Part 352, Subpart C, may be reimbursable or non-reimbursable, in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3343(d-e) and Section 300-3-80.
The Dept. of State foreign country clearance requirements apply to all U.S. government employees working overseas. See HHS Instruction 301-1, Overseas Employment, for requirements or consult OGA at OSPassports@hhs.gov.