
300-2-30: Definitions
A  Calendar Day. Every day of the calendar year including federal holidays and periods when the government is operating under a shutdown furlough (5 CPR §210.102).

B.  Certificates/Certificates of Eligibles. A list of qualified candidates submitted to a hiring manager for appointment consideration in compliance with the appropriate merit staffing procedures.

C.    Direct-Hire Authorit y {DHA). Authority that permits hiring, after public notice, without regard to the rating and ranking procedures and veterans preference provisions of 5 U.S.C §§ 3309 through 3318, and 5 CFR §§211 and 337, Subpart A (OPM Delegated Examining Operations Handbook).

D.    Job Opportunit y Announcement  (JOA). A job announcement posted by an HR Center for an available vacancy.

E.    Merit Promotion (MP) Procedures. A placement made under the authority of 5 CFR §335, Promotion and Internal Placement. With certain important exceptions (e.g., Veterans Employment Opportunities Act) only federal employees who currently hold or previously held a competitive service position may apply for positions that are to be filled under merit promotion procedures.

F.    Ori ginatin g OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Office (Ori gi natin g OHRO ). The human resources office that initiated the hiring action (i.e., posted the JOA).

G.   Receivin g OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Office (Receivin g OHRO). The human resources office that requests a Certificate of Eligibles from an OHRO.

H.    Reemployed Annuitant -A person retired under the Civil Service or Federal Employees Retirement System whose annuity continues after he or she is reemployed by the Federal Government.

I.  Reinstatement -Non-competitive appointment of a person formerly employed in the competitive service (i.e., who either had competitive status or was serving probation when separated) into the competitive service as a career or career-conditional employee (5 CFR Part 315).

J.     Shared Certificates Criteria. The required HHS parameters of a vacancy (job title, series, pay plan, grade level, FPL, duty location, etc.) that must be met in order to share certificates within HHS.  See also Requirements in this Instruction.

K.   Transfer.  A movement of a current career or career-conditional employee in another federal agency to a competitive service position within HHS without a break in service of a single workday (5 CFR §§210.102 and 315.501).

300-2-40: Roles and Responsibilities
A.   HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (HHS OHR):

      1. Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding the Shared Certificates Program consistent with HHS and OPM policies and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.

      2. Provides program oversight of the Shared Certificates Program, consistent with HHS policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.

      3. Periodically conducts accountability reviews of OpDiv/StaffDiv procedures, actions, and records to ensure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.

B.    OpDiv/StaftDiv Human Resources Offices (OHRO):

      1. Comply with this Instruction and any HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.

      2. Designate an OHRO coordinator to administer the day-to-day aspects of the HHS Shared Certificates Program within their serviced division.

      3. Open certificates covered under this policy for 240 calendar days, with no extensions.

      4. Maintain documentation in recruitment case file(s) and/or hiring systems (e.g., USA Staffing, USA Hire) sufficient for third-party reconstruction and for reporting purposes.

      5. Provide records to OPM via HHS OHR on instances of sharing or using shared certificates, upon request.

      6. Cooperate with accountability reviews, or a third-party review or investigation relating to matters pertaining to a shared certificate.

C.   Originating OHRO will:

      1. Clear the HHS Priority Placement Programs (CTAP, ICTAP, and RPL) at initial announcement, in accordance with HHS Instruction 330-2, CTAP, and this Instruction.

      2. Share certificates with interested OHROs, including all case file documentation.  Case file documents must be uploaded in the recruitment and staffing system used to post the job opportunity announcement.

      3. Conduct a quality review of selection(s) prior to sharing a certificate; within seven (7) calendar days from receipt of additional selections; and maintain oversight for each action taken.

      4. Provide notification within seven (7) calendar days to the Receiving OHRO when a selection(s) has been updated in the Staffing system.

      5. Manage case file(s) through audit close out.

D.    Receiving OHRO will:

      1. Verify through job analysis that the minimum qualification requirements (including use of any selective placement factors) and the competencies, or knowledge, skills, and abilities, that were used for the original position are appropriate for their internal position to be filled.

      2. Make selection(s) within 240 calendar days of the date the certificate was created by the Originating OHRO.

      3. Re-clear CTAP, ICTAP, and RPL after 120 calendar days prior to using an HHS shared certificate to make a transfer from another federal agency, in accordance with HHS Instruction 330-2, CTAP, and this Instruction.

      4. Send notification within seven (7) calendar days to the Originating OHRO when selection(s) have been made.

      5. Conduct a quality review of division selection(s) prior to tentative job offer.

      6. Provide selection package(s) after job offer to the Originating OHRO, including all case file documentation  sufficient for third-party reconstruction.

      7. Notify the Originating OHRO within seven (7) calendar days if a selected candidate declines an offer, or if a selected candidate does not onboard with the Department.
