
To White House (WH) and Congressional Committees:
Details to the WH office, the Executive Residence at the WH, the Office of the Vice  President, the Domestic Policy Staff, and the Office of Administration via 3 U.S.C. §112:
An OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee may occasionally recommend one of their employees be detailed to an office listed in (3)(a) immediately above.
Details after the first 180 days must be reimbursable to the Department, except when the requirements described in Section 300-3-80(B)(5) are met.
When the employee is performing work that would otherwise by performed by WH staff, reimbursement for the salary of the HHS employee/detailee is required for any period occurring after the first 180 days after the employee is detailed during any fiscal year.
A detail to a WH office not listed in (3)(a) above who asserts it is not covered by 3 U.S.C. §112 and therefore not required to reimburse the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv is only permissible if the requirements described in Section 300-3-80(B)(5) are met.
Details to Congressional Committees (2 U.S.C. §4301(f)):
Must be initiated by the Senate or House of Representatives, via the HHS Assistant Secretary for Legislation, by written invitation.
Require the written consent of the Committee on Rules and Administration of the Senate or the Committee on House Oversight of the House of Representatives prior to the effective date.
Must be carried out on a reimbursable basis (Detail of Law Enforcement Agents to Congressional Committees, 12 Op. O.L.C. 184, 1988 WL 391014 (Sept. 13, 1988)).
Time Limits for WH and Congressional Details.
Competitive and excepted service employees:

a) Details to the same or lower grade may be made for up to 180 days and can be extended for periods that meet the organizational needs of both the WH or Congress and the employing HHS OpDiv/StaffDiv.

b) Details to a higher-graded position, or to a position with higher promotion potential, can be made without competition for up to 120 days. When computing the total time served on a detail, all noncompetitive details to higher-graded positions and noncompetitive time-limited promotions within the prior 12-month period count toward the 120-day total (5 CFR §335.103(c)(1)(ii)).

c) PHS employees detailed to Congressional committees via 42 U.S.C. §215 follow the rules in this Section under (C)(4) immediately below.
SES employees: Details to a position classified at the SES-level may be made in no more than 120-day increments and can be extended for periods that meet the organizational needs of both the WH or Congress and the employing HHS OpDiv/StaffDiv. SES details are additionally limited by the rules described in this Section under (B)(4) above.
Required Approval. Details and extensions to the WH and Congressional Committees require ASA/OHR approval prior to the effective date. ASA/OHR will coordinate requests with the Assistant Secretary for Legislation and HHS’ WH Liaison (as applicable) for concurrence. Requests must be signed by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee and submitted to NationalandSpecialPrograms@hhs.gov and include:
Employee’s full name;
The WH or Congressional Committee Office;
Description of the duties that support HHS’ or the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv’s mission;
The proposed start date and duration of the detail;
A completed interagency agreement or MOU, as applicable (see Section 300-3-80);
For Details to Congress (unless the detail is via 42 U.S.C. §215 explained in (C)(4) immediately below): A copy of the Congressional Committee’s written request for the employee’s services; and
For WH Offices who are not covered by 3 U.S.C. §112: The statutory authority that explicitly authorizes the detail and explicitly says the WH office does not reimburse loaning agencies for details; or a description of the functions of the detail demonstrating the duties are directly related to the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s appropriations and the detail will assist the OpDiv/StaffDiv in accomplishing programs/activities authorized by appropriation.
Due to the substantial ethical concerns such details raise, recommendation and/or approval may be given only after a careful examination of the duties to be performed and consideration of any Departmental conflicts of interest that may arise from the detail assignment.
Public Health Service (PHS) Details (42 U.S.C. §215):
PHS employees (excluding Commissioned Corp Officers not covered by this policy) may be detailed to the following external organizations for specified purposes:
Another Executive Department, upon the request of that Department Head, to cooperate in or conduct work related to, the functions of the requesting Department or the PHS. See Section 300-3-40, Definitions, or 5 U.S.C. §101.
State health or mental health authorities, upon the request of the State health authority, to assist the State, or a political subdivision of the State, in work related to the public health functions of the PHS. These details may only be made by the HHS Secretary or the Secretary’s designee, per 42 U.S.C. §§ 202, note and 215(b).
Congressional committees and non-profit educational, research, or other institutions engaged in health activities, for special studies of scientific problems and for the dissemination of information relating to public health. These details may only be made by the HHS Secretary or the Secretary’s designee, per 42 U.S.C. §§ 202, note and 215(c).
Approval. Details of PHS employees to the external organizations for the purposes described in (a) immediately above can be approved by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee consistent with the Memo from HHS Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources, Delegation of Human Resources Authorities, dated May 9, 2022. Due to the substantial ethical concerns such details raise, recommendation and/or approval may be given only after a careful examination of the public health duties to be performed and consideration of any Departmental conflicts of interest that may arise from the detail assignment. Approvals must be in writing and include the purpose of the detail, consistent with the requirements in this subsection (C)(4).