
Office of Global Affairs (OGA):
Reviews and gives concurrence/non-concurrence on detail requests from an OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee to international organizations.
Obtains concurrence by the HHS Secretary to request Secretary of State approval to extend a detail to an international organization beyond five (5) years, in cases where the extension is in the national interest. If the HHS Secretary concurs, submits request to the Department of State for approval.
Obtains Dept. of State approval for international organizations not currently on the Dept. of State’s approved organization list, at the request of the OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Center.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Centers:
Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Ensure internal guidance or standard operating procedures on details and IPA assignments adhere to this policy.
Work with their servicing organizations to ensure funds for details and IPA assignments are only used for purposes authorized by appropriation (i.e., appropriations of the loaning OpDiv/StaffDiv can only be used to support programs/activities that have been authorized thru appropriation by Congress). See Section 300-3-80.
Ensure signed agreements are in place prior to the effective date of details and IPAs in accordance with the requirements under Sections 300-3-60 and 300-3-70.
Work with their servicing ethics office(s) to ensure: a) detailees and IPA participants complete a financial disclosure report, as required; b) detailees and IPA participants are counseled prior to the effective date of the detail or IPA assignment on applicable ethics statutes and regulations, including the criminal conflict of interest statutes and Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch; and for IPA assignments, c) the Deputy Ethics Counselor (DEC) or Ethics Coordinator (EC) of the servicing ethics office has certified, as required, that IPA participants have been so counseled and that there are no conflicts of interest with the duties and responsibilities of the proposed IPA assignment. See Sections 300-3-60 and 300-3-70.
Submit requests to employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for OPM approval of details of certain excepted service employees to competitive service positions prior to the effective date. See Section 300-3-60.
Submit requests to SESstaffing@hhs.gov for OPM approval of SES details exceeding 240 days if the detail is for either: a) A non-SES employee to an SES position that supervises other SES positions; or b) An SES employee to a position at the GS-15 or equivalent level or below.
Submit detail and extension requests to the White House and Congressional Committees to NationalandSpecialPrograms@hhs.gov prior to the start date.
Submit requests to employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for OPM approval of a federal employee to participate in the IPA program more than a total of (6) years during their federal career.

300-3-60 Employee Details
General Requirements:
Management may utilize details to address emergency or temporary workforce needs; to offset temporary staffing or workload imbalances; or to address short-term special projects or studies, unless the law or regulation authorizing the detail specifies a different purpose (e.g., 42 U.S.C. §215). The decision to detail an HHS employee is discretionary and based on the ability of the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv to spare the employee’s services without detriment to the office’s work and without requiring it to hire additional staff. Details are not used to circumvent the competitive selection or classification process. For the Indian Health Service: Details are also not used to circumvent Indian Preference laws or regulations (25 U.S.C. §§5116, 5117 and 5129, and 42 CFR §§136.41-43). Input from the HHS employee should be considered before implementing a detail.
An employee may be detailed to a position with duties that are classified at a higher grade, a lower grade, or at the same grade level as the employee’s official position.
An employee is not required to meet time-in-grade or minimum qualification requirements of the position to which the employee is detailed, but must meet the education, licensure and certification requirements for the position to which detailed.
A detail may be to a position with unclassified duties, i.e., the duties to be performed on detail may or may not be duties described in an officially established position description (PD). A statement of duties must be prepared, prior to the detail, by the gaining office.
Employees remain in their official position of record while on detail including for the purposes of the computation of basic pay, promotion, retirement, benefits, bargaining unit status, compensation for injury or death, and military benefits. Service while on detail is credited for time-in-grade purposes at the grade of the position the employee officially holds.
An employee’s Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) exemption status may be affected when a detail exceeds 30 consecutive days and the temporary duties meet the criteria described in 5 CFR §551.211.
The employee’s permanent organization is responsible for ensuring the employee on detail receives appropriate consideration for promotions in their official position of record (5 CFR §335.103(b)(2)) and is kept informed of training opportunities.
Performance management and appraisal requirements must comply with HHS Instruction 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program, or HHS Instruction 430-6, SES Performance Management Program, as applicable.
All employees must meet the applicable personnel security requirements of the detail assignment prior to commencement of a detail.
Employees remain subject to applicable ethics statutes and regulations while on detail including: 18 U.S.C. §§ 201-227  – Criminal Conflicts of Interest; 5 U.S.C. app.  – Ethics in Government Act of 1978; 5 U.S.C. §§ 7321-7326  and 5 C.F.R. Part 734 – Hatch Act and implementing Political Activities Regulation; 5 U.S.C. § 7342  – Foreign Gifts and Decorations Act; 5 U.S.C. § 7353  – Gifts to Federal Employees; 41 U.S.C. §§ 2101-2107  – Ethics provisions of the Procurement Integrity Act; 5 C.F.R. Part 735 – Employee Responsibilities and Conduct; 5 C.F.R. Part 2634 – Executive Branch Financial Disclosure and Related Requirements; 5 C.F.R. Part 2635 – Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch; 5 C.F.R. Part 5501 – HHS Supplemental Standards of Ethical Conduct; and 5 C.F.R. Part 5502 – HHS Supplemental Financial Disclosure Reporting Requirements. The servicing ethics office of the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv is responsible for communicating these requirements to their employee. Questions should be directed to the servicing Deputy Ethics Counselor and/or Ethics Coordinator, a list of whom can be found at https://www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/ogc/contact-ogc/agency-deputy-ethics-counselors- and-ethics-coordinators/index.html.
Employees on detail remain subject to the provisions of 5 U.S.C. Chapter 73, which regulates employee suitability, security, and conduct, including restrictions on political activity, and agency standards of conduct regulations.
A detail ends upon the Not-To-Exceed (NTE) date documented on the Standard Form (SF) 50 or SF-52 unless an extension is approved. Requests for extending details must be made prior to the NTE date of the detail. See also Section 300-3-90, Documentation.
A detail may be terminated, at the discretion of the loaning or gaining organization, prior to the documented NTE date.
Employees return to their official position of record upon the detail’s NTE date or early termination of the detail.
Details Within HHS (5 U.S.C. §§3341).
Details within HHS must be reimbursable with few exceptions. For additional information, see Section 300-3-80, Reimbursable and Non-reimbursable Agreements.
Work Restriction. 5 U.S.C. §3341(a) does not allow an agency to detail employees who are required by law to be exclusively engaged in specific work. Accordingly, an HHS employee who is appointed by an authority that specifies the type of work to be performed cannot be detailed. This legal prohibition applies to all HHS employees, including politicals and employees appointed via a non-Title 5 hiring authority.
Competitive and Excepted Service Employee Details.
