
Time Limits. Details of PHS employees to the external organizations for the purposes described in (a) immediately above can be approved for a period of time that meets the public health mission of the OpDiv/StaffDiv and the organizational needs of requesting external organization described above, except for the following:
Competitive and excepted service employee details to a higher-graded federal position, or to a position with higher promotion potential, can be made without competition for up to 120 days. (This restriction applies to the Executive Department and Congressional committee details described in (a)(i) and (iii) above.) When computing the total time served on a detail, all noncompetitive details to higher-graded positions and noncompetitive time-limited promotions within the prior 12-month period count toward the 120-day total (5 CFR §335.103(c)(1)(ii)).
SES details are additionally limited by the rules described in this Section under (B)(4) above.
Details to an overseas location (see (g) below).
Details of PHS employees to the external organizations for the purposes described under (a) above may be reimbursable or non-reimbursable, in accordance with 42 U.S.C. §215 and Section 300-3-80:
An OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee may condition a detail to either (a)(ii) or (iii) above as reimbursable by the State, subdivision, or institution (42 U.S.C. §215(d)).
Salary and allowances of a PHS employee detailed to another Executive Department described in (a)(i) above are paid in accordance with 42 U.S.C. §215(a).
A PHS employee on a detail to either (a)(ii) or (iii) above is paid by PHS appropriations except when the employee is placed on leave without pay (LWOP), with the employee’s consent, and paid by the State, subdivision, or institution to which they are detailed (42 U.S.C. §215(d)).

For Special Consultant employees appointed via 42 U.S.C. §209(f), a LWOP arrangement may only be for a period NTE two (2) years but can be extended for additional periods NTE two (2) years each (42 CFR §22.5).
PHS employee details within HHS. 42 U.S.C §215 does not authorize details within HHS; therefore, details within HHS must follow the rules (including time limits, restrictions, and applicable OPM approvals to a competitive service position) in this Section under (B) above.
PHS employee details to the White House. Details to the WH are not authorized via 42 U.S.C. §215; therefore, WH details are made via 3 U.S.C. §112 and the rules described in this Section under (C)(3) above.
PHS employee details to International Organizations are made via 5 CFR Part 352, Subpart C, and the rules described in this Section under (C)(2) above.

Overseas Location: Details to an overseas location of an Executive Department, state health authority, or institution described in (a) above can be made via 42 U.S.C. §215 and do not require Dept. of State organization approval. However, the Dept. of State foreign country clearance requirements apply to all U.S. government employees working overseas. Details to overseas locations additionally must adhere the other requirements in HHS Instruction 301-1, Overseas Employment, including tour of duty limits.
Details (i.e., Rotational Assignments) for Employees in Formal Training Programs:
Pathways Programs (5 CFR Part 362 and HHS Instruction, 362-1, Pathways Programs).
The general requirements for details in this Section (300-3-60(A)) and the rules for reimbursable and non-reimbursable agreements in Section 300-3-80 must be followed.
Pathways participants (with the exception of Intern NTE) may be detailed for one (1) to six (6) months in duration within their employing OpDiv/StaffDiv, or anywhere within HHS. Details do not need to be in same occupation in which the participant will likely convert; however, must be for the purposes of providing the participant with valuable knowledge, skills, and experiences; to broaden their perspective of the OpDiv/StaffDiv and/or HHS mission; and to aid in their retention. Such details may be used to give the participant knowledge, skills, or abilities in another area of the functional discipline of the participant’s occupation, or in another OpDiv/StaffDiv with similar occupations, for example.
Presidential Management Fellows (PMFs) may also be detailed to external organizations as part of their development, in accordance with 5 CFR §362.405(b)(4-5) and the rules described in HHS Instruction, 362-1, Pathways Programs.
All other employee rotational assignments (i.e., details) as part of a formal training or development program must follow the rules in this policy, unless the program is authorized by a law or regulation that specifies separate rules for such rotational assignments.
300-3-70 Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) Assignments
The Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) authorizes temporary assignments via detail or temporary appointment of permanent employees between the federal government and state and local governments, colleges and universities, Indian tribal governments, federally funded research and development centers and other eligible organizations (5 U.S.C. Chapter 33, Subchapter VI, and 5 CFR Part 334). The IPA program allows agencies to access expertise from outside the federal government and provide eligible federal employees with developmental opportunities.
IPA assignments are initiated by management and must be mutually beneficial to both the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv and the non-federal organization. Assignments are voluntary and must be agreed to by the employee. Each IPA assignment must be examined to ensure it supports the participating organizations’ mission. Cost sharing arrangements are negotiated between the two participating organizations adhering to the requirements in this Section and Section 300-3-80. The OpDiv/StaffDiv may agree to reimburse the non-federal organization for all, some, or none of the costs of the assignment. (Questions on miscellaneous expenses not covered in this policy should be directed to the HR Center’s servicing finance staff. See Section 300-3-80(G).)
Eligible Employees (5 U.S.C. §3372 and 5 CFR §334.102). See OPM.gov/Data Standards/Tenure for tenure group definitions.
Competitive Service Employees in Tenure Group 1 or 2;
Excepted Service Employees in Tenure Group 1 or 2 (including equivalent tenured non-Title 5 employees, and excluding Indefinite, time-limited, PA/PAS, and Schedule C excepted service appointments);
Career SES Employees (excludes Non-career, Limited Term or Limited Emergency SES); and
Individuals employed for at least 90 days in a career position with a State, local, or Indian tribal government, institution of higher education, or other eligible organization.
Eligible Organizations are State or local governments, colleges or universities, Indian tribal governments, or other organizations defined by 5 U.S.C. §3371 and described under 5 CFR §334.102. Organizations must be certified to participate in an IPA prior to assignment. HR Centers are responsible for verifying an organization’s eligibility and certifying the organization, if necessary, prior to the IPA assignment. Information listed under 5 CFR §334.103 is required from organizations requesting IPA certification. If an organization has previously been certified by a federal agency (or another OpDiv/StaffDiv), the certification is permanent. HR Centers may accept a copy of the federal agency’s or OpDiv/StaffDiv’s certification as proof of eligibility or require the organization to resubmit information to verify the organization still meets the criteria. The list of the National Science Foundation’s designated Federally Funded Research and Development Centers eligible for IPA participation can be found at NSF.gov.