
Non-federal employees on assignment to the federal government are subject to the provisions of 5 U.S.C. Chapter 73, which regulates employee suitability, security, and conduct, including restrictions on political activity, and agency standards of conduct regulations.
HR Centers must consult/work with their finance, personnel security, ethics and labor and employee relations staff, and the Office of the General Counsel to implement an IPA agreement, including ensuring the servicing ethics office provides counseling on applicable ethics statutes and regulations and assigns a financial disclosure report for completion by an assignee to HHS, as required.
An IPA assignment may be terminated at any time at the request of HHS or the non-federal organization. Where possible, the party requesting termination should provide a 30-day advance written notice to the other parties of the agreement.
300-3-80 Reimbursable and Non-reimbursable Agreements
Funds for details and IPA assignments can only be used for purposes authorized by appropriation, i.e., the appropriations of the loaning OpDiv/StaffDiv can only be used to support programs/activities that have been authorized thru appropriation by Congress (31 U.S.C. §1301(a)).
Details (for details via IPA, see (C) immediately below):
Details within HHS must be reimbursable. Exceptions to this rule are (5)(a) or (b) immediately below.
Details to another agency must be reimbursable. Exceptions to this rule are (5)(a) and (b) immediately below. See Section 300-1-40 for agency definition.
Details to Congressional committees under 2 U.S.C. §4301(f) must be reimbursable (Detail of Law Enforcement Agents to Congressional Committees, 12 Op. O.L.C. 184, 1988 WL 391014 (Sept. 13, 1988)), see Section 300-3-60(C)(3). No exceptions.
Details to the WH office, the Executive Residence at the WH, the Office of the Vice President, the Domestic Policy Staff, and the Office of Administration via 3 U.S.C. §112:
Details after the first 180 days must be reimbursable to the Department, except when the requirements in (5)(b) immediately below are met.
When the employee is performing work that would otherwise by performed by WH staff, reimbursement for the salary of the HHS employee/detailee is required for any period occurring after the first 180 days after the employee is detailed during any fiscal year.
A detail to a WH office not listed in (4) immediately above who asserts it is not covered by 3 U.S.C. §112 and therefore not required to reimburse the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv is only permissible if the requirements described in (5)(b) immediately below are met.
Non-reimbursable details can be made only when either:
A law specifically authorizes non-reimbursable details, for example:
Details to international organizations via 5 CFR Part 352, Subpart C, may be reimbursable or non-reimbursable (5 U.S.C. §3343(d-e)).
PHS employee details to the external organizations listed in Section 300-3-60(C)(4) may be reimbursable or non-reimbursable (42 U.S.C. §215). For additional Title 42 reimbursement requirements, see Section 300-3-60(C)(4)(d).
OR
The functions of the detail are related to the loaning agency’s/division’s appropriations and the detail will assist the loaning agency/division in accomplishing programs/activities authorized by appropriation. (Reimbursement of the Internal Revenue Service for Investigative Services Provided to the Independent Counsel, 12 Op. O.L.C. 233, 1988 WL 391018 (Sept. 30 , 1988); see also Reimbursement for Detail of JAG Corps Personnel to US Attorney’s Office, 13 Op. O.L.C. 188, 1989 WL 595823 (June 27, 1989))
IPA Assignments (Details or Temporary Excepted Appointments via IPA):
Cost sharing arrangements are negotiated between the two participating organizations following the requirements in this Section and Section 300-3-70. The OpDiv/StaffDiv may agree to reimburse the non-federal organization for all, some, or none of the costs of the assignment. (Questions on miscellaneous expenses not covered in this policy should be directed to the HR Center’s servicing finance staff. See (G) below.)
Pay, travel and transportation expenses for federal employees on an IPA assignment to state or local governments may be reimbursable or non-reimbursable (5 U.S.C. §3373(b)).
Travel and transportation expenses for individuals on an IPA assignment from federal, state, or local governments may be reimbursable or non-reimbursable (5 U.S.C. §3375).
Payment of travel and transportation expenses is made consistent with the HHS Travel Policy.
A federal employee may not receive pay in addition to the pay of their official position of record for performing the duties of another position (5 U.S.C. §5535(b)).
Required Finance Agreement for Reimbursable Details and IPA Assignments. Inter or Intra Agency Agreements (IAA) are either between two federal agencies (inter-agency) or two HHS OpDiv/StaffDivs (intra-agency). IAAs describe the services to be performed; identify the legal authority to transfer funds from one appropriation to another; and must be executed and recorded prior to the start of the detail or IPA assignment in accordance with HHS Financial Management  Directives and Guidance (FMD&G), Chapter 2 Interagency Agreement, using the Department of Treasury forms required by the FMD&G.
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers should consult their division’s servicing finance staff on executing IAAs; how to document financial agreements with non-federal organizations; and any questions on payment of expenses not covered in this policy. The legal and regulatory requirements covered in this policy regarding reimbursable and non-reimbursable expenses take precedence when there is a conflict with ASFR policy decisions. Per the FMD&G, HR Centers should notify their servicing finance officer of any such policy conflicts.
Non-reimbursable Agreements. Participating organizations should execute a MOU for non- reimbursable details to document the terms of the detail. MOU examples can be found on OPM.gov. Non-reimbursable IPAs are documented via the IPA agreement, see Section 300-3-70.
Service Agreements.
IPA Assignment: The service requirement is included on the IPA agreement, see Section 300-3-70, Required IPA Agreement.
Non-Reimbursable Detail (outside of IPA): A service requirement, if applicable, is documented on a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), see H. immediately above.
Reimbursable Details (outside of IPA): HR Centers should consult their servicing finance office on how to document a service requirement, e.g., whether to include the requirement on the IAA, attach the service agreement to the IAA, etc.


300-3-90 Documentation and Accountability
Details and IPA assignments are documented in accordance with OPM’s Guide to Processing Personnel Actions (GPPA):
Chapter 11, Excepted Service Appointments. Temporary appointment of non-federal employees under IPA (5 U.S.C. §3374).
Chapter 14, Details. A SF-50 or SF-52 is used, depending on type of action, and retained on the permanent side of the employee’s official personnel folder. In cases where the GPPA says no documentation is required, a SF-52 is used consistent with 5 U.S.C. §3341 which requires details to be documented in writing and approved by an agency official. 42 U.S.C. §215 is cited as the legal authority for details of PHS personnel to external organizations listed in Section 300-3-60(C)(4).
Chapter 15, Placement on Non-Pay or Non-Duty Status. LWOP actions.
Special Government Employees.   Remark code E21 should be used for individuals who are designated special government employees (SGE) as defined under 18 U.S.C. §202. Questions regarding the SGE ethics designation should be directed to an OpDiv/StaffDiv’s servicing ethics office. A list of servicing Deputy Ethics Counselors and Ethics Coordinators can be found at https://www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/ogc/contact-ogc/agency-deputy-ethics-counselors-and-  ethics-coordinators/index.html.
Records, including IPA agreements (and any modifications), proof of IPA organization eligibility, financial agreements, and all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained for a total of three (3) full years after completion of the detail or IPA assignment in accordance with this Instruction and 5 CFR §334.106(b). Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed.
ASA/OHR Policy and Accountability Division (PAD) or OPM may conduct accountability reviews to ensure compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.