Type of Assignment.
Federal Employees: Detail. With the consent of the employee, IPA assignments may also be made by placing the employee on leave without pay.
Non-federal Employees: Detail or a temporary excepted service appointment.
Work schedule: IPA assignments may be intermittent, part-time, or full-time.
Time Limits (5 U.S.C. §3372 and 5 CFR §334.104):
IPA assignments may be made for up to two (2) years and may be extended by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee for an additional two (2) years when the extension benefits both organizations.
IPA assignments of federal employees to Indian tribes or tribal organizations (defined at 5 U.S.C. §3371(2)(C)) may be made for up to two (2) years and may be extended for any length of time by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee when the continuation of the assignment will benefit both the OpDiv/StaffDiv and the Indian tribe or tribal organization. If the assigned employee fails to complete the period of assignment and there is another employee willing and available to do so, the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee may assign the employee to complete the period of assignment and execute an agreement with the tribal organization with respect to the replacement employee. The new agreement may provide for a different period of assignment as agreed to by both the OpDiv/StaffDiv and the tribal organization. (5 U.S.C. §3372(a))
OpDivs/StaffDivs cannot send or receive an individual on an IPA assignment if the individual has served four (4) continuous years on a single IPA assignment without at least a 12-month return to duty with his/her official employer. Consecutive IPA assignments without a break of at least 60 days is regarded as continuous service under IPA. (Assignments to Indian tribes or tribal organizations excluded.)
Federal employees are prohibited from participating on IPA assignment(s) for more than a total of six (6) years during their federal career. HR Center requests to waive this provision must be submitted to employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for OPM approval, consistent with 5 CFR §334.104. (Assignments to Indian tribes or tribal organizations excluded.)
Federal Employees.
Federal employees on IPA assignments remain employees of HHS (i.e., their employing OpDiv/StaffDiv), occupying their official position of record, including for the purposes of the computation of basic pay, promotion, retirement, benefits, bargaining unit status, compensation for injury or death, and military benefits. Service while on an IPA assignment is credited for time-in-grade purposes at the grade of the position the employee officially holds. Employees are required to fulfill any mandatory training requirements while on assignment, and supervisors must consider employees for promotion (5 CFR §335.103(b)(2)). Employees return to their official position of record upon completion of assignment or are reassigned to a position of like pay and grade (5 CFR §334.107(b)).
The rate of pay for a federal employee assigned to a federally funded research and development center may not exceed the rate of pay the employee would be paid for continued service in his/her HHS official position of record (5 U.S.C. §3372(e)(1)).
Federal employees on leave without pay (LWOP) and on an IPA assignment to a state or local government are:
Entitled to receive supplemental pay from their employing OpDiv/StaffDiv, if the state or local government rate of pay is less than the rate of pay the employee would have received had he/she not agreed to the IPA assignment. Supplemental pay is in amount equal to the difference between their official rate of pay and the state or local government rate (5 U.S.C. §3373(c)(1)); and
Entitled to the continuation of federal health and life insurance as long as the employee continues to make employee contributions; and are entitled to credit for the period of the IPA assignment toward federal retirement and unemployment compensation as specified under 5 U.S.C. §3373(c)(3), except as limited therein.
Rules on the election and receipt of benefits due to compensable injury or death are described under 5 U.S.C. §3373(d).
See also OPM Fact Sheet: Effect of Extended LWOP on Federal Benefits and Programs.
Non-federal employees must be employed at least 90 days in a permanent/career position with a State or local government, college or university, Indian tribal government, or other organization described under 5 U.S.C. §3371 and 5 CFR §334.102 to be eligible for an IPA assignment. They serve on either a detail or a temporary excepted appointment, in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §§3371-3375 and OPM.gov/Intergovernmental Personnel Act:
Detail
Non-federal employees may be detailed to competitive, excepted, or SES General positions.
Non-federal employees detailed to HHS OpDivs/StaffDivs remain employees of their non-federal organization. They continue to be paid by their non-federal employer; are not covered by the federal government leave system; and are not eligible to enroll in the federal health benefits programs, group life insurance, or the federal retirement system.
Non-federal employees detailed to a classified position earn the basic rate of pay, including locality, equal to the salary of the classified position. If the detailee’s non- federal salary is less than the minimum rate of pay of the classified position, the OpDiv/StaffDiv must supplement their non-federal salary to make up the difference. Supplemental pay cannot be paid in advance or in a lump sum and is not conditional on completion of the assignment. Supplemental pay may be paid directly to the detailee or reimbursed to the non-federal organization.
