
Time Limits.
Details to a position at the same or lower grade level may be made without competition for up to 120 days and can be extended in no more than 120-day increments to meet the organizational needs of both the gaining and lending offices/divisions (5 U.S.C. §3341).
Details to a higher-graded position, or to a position with higher promotion potential, may be made without competition for up to 120 days. When computing the total time served on a detail, noncompetitive details to higher graded positions and noncompetitive time-limited promotions within the prior 12-month period count toward the 120-day total (5 CFR §335.103(c)(1)(ii)).
A detail more than 30 days but less than 120 days to a higher-graded supervisor or manager position should be rotated among eligible staff. Consideration should also be given to a time-limited promotion under 5 CFR §335.102(f).
Competitive service employees may be detailed to competitive service or excepted service positions.
Excepted service employees may be detailed to a position in the excepted service.
A detail of an excepted service employee to a position in the competitive service requires OPM approval prior to the effective date of the detail (5 CFR §6.5 and 5 CFR §300.301).

Exceptions from the OPM approval requirement:
An excepted service employee hired via a Schedule A authority (i.e., a government-wide Schedule A authority under 5 CFR §213.3102 or an OpDiv/StaffDiv-specific Schedule A authority);
A Schedule B authority (under 5 CFR §213.3202);
A Schedule D authority (Pathways Programs under 5 CFR §213.3402(a-c)); or
A Veterans Recruitment Appointment (P.L. 107-288) may be detailed to a competitive service position without prior OPM approval.
Requests for OPM approval to detail excepted service employees to positions in the competitive service are sent to the ASA/OHR for review and concurrence. HR Centers must send such requests with the following information to employmentpolicy@hhs.gov:
Information on the excepted service position (appointment authority and employee’s position of record, including title, series, grade level, and organization);
Information on the competitive service position that will be filled (title, series, grade, and organization);
Purpose of the detail or the duties to be performed during the detail;
Reason why a competitive service employee cannot serve in the detail (e.g., special skills/competencies the excepted service employee will bring to the competitive service position); and
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Director approval.
SES Details (5 CFR §317.903 and OPM SES Desk Guide - PDF).
Time Limits.
Details of an SES employee to a position classified at the SES-level may be made for up to 120 days and can be extended in no more than 120-day increments to meet the organizational needs of both the gaining and lending offices/divisions.
Details of an SES employee to unclassified duties may be made in no more than 120-day increments and cannot exceed 240 days. For details exceeding 240 days, the HR Center is required to determine if the unclassified duties are at the SES level. If at SES level, the HR Center must request an SES allocation at SESstaffing@hhs.gov to establish a SES position to continue the detail. If below the SES level, OPM approval is required for a detail extension to a position at the GS-15 or equivalent level or below (see (a)(v) immediately below for instructions).
An SES employee may not be detailed to a series of positions with unclassified duties, or a series of positions at the GS-15 or equivalent level, to ‘restart’ the 240-day clock.
Details of a non-SES employee to a SES position must be made in no more than 120-day increments and cannot exceed 240 days. Competitive procedures must be followed when the detail exceeds 240 days unless the employee is eligible for a noncompetitive career SES appointment (i.e., a SES Candidate Development Program graduate or a former SES Career employee with noncompetitive reinstatement eligibility). OpDiv/StaffDivs cannot intentionally create a break before 240 consecutive days to ‘restart’ the 240-day clock. Competition is not required to detail a different employee to the SES position.
OPM must approve details more than 240 days if the detail is either: a) A non-SES employee to an SES position that supervises other SES positions; or b) An SES employee to a position at the GS-15 or equivalent level or below. HR Centers must send such requests with the following information to SESstaffing@hhs.gov:

a) A memorandum from the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee requesting extension and approval of the detail;

b) A detailed written justification outlining the circumstances requiring the extension, including proposed number of days up to a maximum of 120 days;

c) A written description of how the position’s duties have been performed since vacant and alternatives the OpDiv/StaffDiv considered before making the extension request; and

d) The OpDiv/StaffDiv organization chart, and name and appointment type of the official who supervises the employee on detail.
Details of SES employees cannot be used to circumvent the advance notice requirements for SES reassignments, or the 120-day moratorium on involuntary reassignments following the appointment of a new HHS Secretary or non-career supervisor (PAS, PA, NCSES).
Any SES employee or non-SES employee may be detailed to a SES General position.