
301-1-70 Tour of Duty
Tour of duty is up to 24 or 36 months, at the discretion of the OpDiv/StaffDiv; however, time limits are dependent on the hiring authority used to fill the overseas position.  For example, temporary appointments made under 5 CFR 316, Subpart D, are for periods not to exceed one (1) year, then may be extended up to a maximum of one (1) additional year (24 months total duration). 
Employees may serve up to a maximum of six (6) consecutive years in a single country.  However,  some hiring authorities have different time limits, e.g., Temporary and Term appointments (5 CFR Part 316); Overseas Limited appointments (5 CFR 301, Subpart B); and Details and Transfers to International Organizations (5 CFR §352.302), etc.  See Section 301-1-80.  
The tour of duty begins on the date of arrival at the overseas duty location (or the entrance on duty date when recruited overseas) and ends either at the expiration of appointment or on the day of departure (5 CFR §630.603).
When computing overseas service, the following are included: 1) authorized leave with pay; 2) absence in a non-pay status up to a maximum of two (2) workweeks within each 12 months of service; 3) time spent in the U.S. Armed Forces; and 4) details (5 CFR §630.603).
Tour of duty may be shortened by the employee or the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv (conditions are covered in the service agreement; e.g., by mutual agreement, with 30 days advance notice, etc.)   Details to international organizations (5 CFR Part 352) may be terminated, at the discretion of the loaning or gaining organization, prior to the documented NTE date.
Tour of duty may be extended by the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv up to 120 days for administrative purposes, as long as the time limits of the hiring authority used to fill the overseas position are not exceeded.
An exemption to the six (6) year single country limit requires prior approval by the Director, Office of Global Affairs (OGA), with concurrence by the HHS DASHR/CHCO.  Requests are sent to OGA at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov at least six (6) months prior to the last day of the current tour. 
Changes to the tour of duty are annotated on the service agreement and signed by all parties (employee, supervisor, loaning and gaining organizations for details).  See also Section 301-1-100.
301-1-80 Recruitment and Staffing
Prior to filling overseas positions, the Career Transition Assistance Program (CTAP), Interagency Career Transition Assistance Program (ICTAP), the HHS Reemployment Priority List (RPL) and/or the HHS Priority Reemployment List (PRL) must be cleared unless the staffing action is one of the exceptions listed in the Appendices of HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs (5 CFR Part 302 and 5 CFR §§330.211, 330.609, 330.707).
HHS overseas positions can be filled by a time-limited appointment via one of the following staffing methods:
Competitive examining, merit promotion, direct hire authority, temporary or term employment, or excepted service recruitment (5 CFR §8.1), following the rules of the applicable hiring authority. 

Actions are processed according to the type of appointment, see OPM Guide to Processing Personnel Actions (GPPA), Chapter 9, Career and Career-Conditional Appts; Chapter 11, Excepted Service Appts; or Chapter 10, Non-status Appts in the Competitive Service (temporary/term, etc.). 
Title 42 hiring authority (i.e., 42 U.S.C. §§209 (f) or (g); 42 U.S.C. 237; or an OpDiv/StaffDiv-specific Title 42 hiring authority, following HHS Instructions 42-1, 42-2, or 42-3 as applicable).  Before using an OpDiv/StaffDiv-specific Title 42 authority to fill an overseas position, HR Centers should review the language of their Division’s Title 42 hiring authority and/or consult their legal counsel to ensure such use is legally supportable. 

Use Nature of Action Code ZLM and cite the applicable Title 42 legal authority when processing actions (see OPM GPPA, Chapter 11, Excepted Service Appts).
Discretionary actions listed under an HR Center’s merit promotion plan (5 CFR §335.103(c)(3)).  When an OpDiv/StaffDiv has a documented Merit Promotion (MP) Plan that includes the requirements listed under 5 CFR §335.103 and has identified the discretionary action(s) under 5 CFR 335.103(c)((3) in its MP plan, an OpDiv/StaffDiv may:
Promote, reassign, demote, transfer, reinstate, or detail an employee to an overseas position that has no greater promotion potential than the employee holds or previously held on a permanent basis in the competitive service;
Temporarily promote or detail an employee to higher graded position or a position with a higher promotion potential for 120 days or less; etc.
See OPM GPPA, Chapter 14, Promotions, Changes to Lower Grades, Reassignments, Details, etc. when processing actions.  Details must adhere to the requirements in HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments.
Time-Limited Promotion to fill temporary positions for a specified period not more than five (5) years, in accordance with 5 CFR §335.102, when (a) and (b) immediately below are met.
OpDivs/StaffDivs must give an employee advance written notice of the conditions of the time-limited promotion, including: 1) the time limit; 2) reason for time limit; 3) the requirement for competition for promotion beyond 120 days if applicable (see (b) immediately below); 4) the employee may be returned to the position from which temporarily promoted (or to a position of equivalent grade and pay) at any time; and 5) the return is not subject to reduction in force (RIF), performance or adverse action or grievance procedures (5 CFR §335.102(f)(1)).
Competition for a time-limited promotion over 120 days is required unless:
the time-limited promotion is made under competitive procedures and the job opportunity announcement stated the temporary promotion may be made permanent (5 CFR §335.103(c)(1)(i)); or
the employee previously held the proposed grade level on a permanent basis in the competitive service (5 CFR §335.103(c)(3)(iv) or (v)).
Use OPM GPPA, Chapter 14, Promotions, Changes to Lower Grades, Reassignments, Details, etc. when processing actions.
Overseas Limited Appointment (5 CFR §§8.2 and 301, Subpart B).
An overseas limited appointment may be given to a U.S. citizen previously recruited overseas for a position overseas if a competitive examining job announcement open to applicants in the local overseas area results in a shortage of eligible applicants (defined by 5 CFR §337.202(b)).

OR
An overseas limited appointment may be given to a U.S. citizen recruited outside an overseas area when an HR Center determines that unusual or emergency conditions exist that make it not possible or impracticable to appoint from a register (5 CFR §§8.2 and 301.202). 
Time Limits.  Overseas limited appointments are an indefinite duration, unless otherwise limited (5 CFR §301.203):
OpDiv/StaffDivs can limit overseas term appointments to five (5) years maximum, as part of a documented overseas rotation program for career/career-conditional employees, or
OpDiv/StaffDivs can make overseas limited appointments for one (1) year or less (which may be extended for up to a maximum of one (1) additional year, or 24 months total duration) to meet administrative needs.
OPM may approve an exception to the time limits in (c)(i) and (ii) based on an HHS HQ-level request (HR Centers send requests to ASA/OHR at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov).
Overseas limited appointments of an indefinite duration are exempt by regulation (5 CFR 301.203) from the HHS tour of duty limits in Section 301-1-70 (A-B). 