
Citizenship.  Individuals who are not U.S. citizens or nationals cannot be appointed to competitive service positions within the U.S. (Executive Order 11935).  In addition, the Consolidated Appropriations Act (i.e., the annual federal budget) contains a government-wide prohibition on compensating individuals who are not U.S. citizens or nationals for any federal position within the U.S., unless the agency has a statutory exemption to the ban.  Within HHS, only 42 U.S.C. §209(h) permits hiring non-U.S. citizens as Special Consultants (42 U.S.C §209(f)) or Service Fellows (42 U.S.C. §209(g)) to positions within the U.S. without regard to the appropriations ban.  There are not similar restrictions to appointing or compensating non-U.S. citizens to positions outside the U.S.; however, with the exception of employees hired under 42 U.S.C §§209(f) or (g), HHS has no legal authority to pay non-U.S. citizens the allowances and differentials under 5 U.S.C. §§5923-5928 (5 U.S.C. §5922), see Section 301-1-90 for additional information.  Consult the Office of the General Counsel with any questions.
301-1-90 Pay, Leave, and Benefits
Classification and Pay.  HHS employees in a position with an overseas duty location are covered by the classification and pay administration rules under Title 5 (5 U.S.C. Chapters 51, 53, and 55, and 5 CFR Parts 511 and 550), except for:
Comparability Pay.  In lieu of locality-based pay,overseas employees excluding Title 38 physicians (series 602), podiatrists (series 668), and dentists (series 680), receive comparability pay in addition to base pay that is calculated as 2/3 of the Washington, D.C. locality pay rate.  Rate is limited to the Executive Schedule Level IV rate.  Basic pay is used in calculating overseas allowances.  (Public Law (P.L.) 114-113 §212(3); P.L. 114-223 Div. C; P.L. 114-254 Div. A §101(1))  HHS annual overseas pay comparability tables are located at https://intranet.hhs.gov/hr/policy.
Physician, Dentist and Podiatrist Pay (PDP).  Physicians (series 602), podiatrists (series 668),and dentists (series 680) are eligible for Title 38 market pay, in accordance with HHS Instruction 590-1, Physician, Dentist, and Podiatrist Pay.  Market pay is a component of annual pay intended to reflect the recruitment and retention needs for the specialty or assignment of a particular HHS physician.  Employees who receive market pay are also eligible for overseas allowances, with the exception of any premium pay (including compensatory time).  Overseas allowances are computed based upon applicable percentage of the employee’s GS base pay plus market pay.  In no case may the total amount of compensation paid to a physician, podiatrist, or dentist exceed the amount of annual compensation of the President of the United States (3 U.S.C. §102).
Allowances and Differentials (5 U.S.C. §5913, 5922-5928 and the Dept. of State Regulations (DSSR).  See also the definition of transfer in this policy, Section 301-1-40). 

The Executive Orders listed in the DSSR (Chapter 010) give the Dept. of State authority to prescribe regulations on the allotment of funds under 5 U.S.C. §5913, and allowances and differentials under 5 U.S.C. §§5921-5928 for federal employees working in a foreign area.  (OPM regulations for non-foreign areas are at 5 CFR Part 591, Subpart B.)  HR Centers should direct questions concerning the DSSR to the Office of Global Affairs at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov.

HHS employees who are U.S. citizens and work in a foreign area (defined under 5 U.S.C. §5921(6) and DSSR Chapter 040(f) and (i)) may be eligible for the following the allowances and differentials. 

HHS exception to U.S. citizen requirement:  Non-U.S. citizens hired via 42 U.S.C. §§209(f) or (g) and work in a foreign area defined under 5 U.S.C. §5921(6) may also be eligible for the following allowances and differentials (42 U.S.C. §209(h) and 40 Comp. Gen. 628 (May 18, 1961)).  See also Section 301-1-80, Citizenship.
Quarters allowances described under 5 U.S.C. §5923 when Government owned or rented quarters are not provided without charge (see also DSSR Chapter 100);
Cost-of-Living Allowances under 5 U.S.C. §5924 when applicable (see also DSSR Chapter 200);
Post hardship differential(s) based on environmental conditions described under 5 U.S.C. §5925 and the requirements described in DSSR Chapter 500;
Difficult to Staff Incentive Differential (DSID), also referred to as a Service Need Differential (SND).  It may be granted to an employee assigned to a foreign post which is authorized by the Dept. of State for a 15%, 20%, 25%, 30% or 35% post hardship differential, after it is determined that especially adverse environmental conditions warrant additional pay as an incentive to fill the employee's position at that post.  It may be granted at the time of a second or subsequent tour in a DSID/SND designated post.  Justifications must be made in writing.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee may authorize the payment up to an additional 15%  over basic compensation to an employee assigned to a foreign post designated by the Dept. of State for a DSID.
If the post for which the DSID is authorized is also authorized for Danger Pay Allowance ((7) immediately below), the combination of the Danger Pay Allowance and the DSID may not exceed 35% of the basic compensation.
Should post hardship differential fall below the 15% requirement, the employee will continue to receive DSID until the end of his or her tour of duty or permanent departure from the post.
Only employees who are eligible to receive post hardship differential as defined in DSSR Chapter 500 may receive DSID.
Authorizing and certifying officials approve payment of an employee’s SND/DSID allowance upon submission by the employee of a properly executed SF-1190 and confirmation by the authorizing official that payment is appropriate.
Compensatory time at certain foreign areas described under 5 U.S.C. §5926 (see also DSSR Chapter 800), excluding employees in positions listed in (A)(2) immediately above;
Advances in pay described under 5 U.S.C. §5927(a)(1-2) (see also DSSR Chapter 850); and
Danger pay allowance under 5 U.S.C. §5928 when applicable (see also DSSR Chapter 650). 
Official residence expenses under 5 U.S.C. §5913 may be paid to an HHS senior official who is  working in a foreign country and who has been designated by the Secretary of State as occupying a position of such importance that the Government should defray the unusual expenses incident to the operation and maintenance of his/her official residence and the HHS Secretary has determined the overseas residence as an official residence in accordance with the DSSR Chapter 400.
Leave.  HHS employees in a position with an overseas duty location are covered by the leave rules under 5 U.S.C. Chapter 63,  5 CFR Part 630, and HHS Instruction 630-1, Leave and Excused Absence - PDF.  Employees are eligible for home leave when they have completed 24 months of continuous service outside the U.S. in accordance with the rules described under 5 CFR 630, Subpart F.