
Other requirements (5 CFR §§8.2, and 301.204-206):
Candidates must meet OPM’s qualification requirements for the position;
Time in grade applies to overseas limited appointments;
Employees are eligible for within-grade increases;
Employees are not eligible for federal retirement, unless eligible through continuity of service or length of appointment;
Overseas limited employees must serve a one (1) year trial period and may be terminated at any time during their trial period after the advance notice requirements described in 5 CFR 315.804 and 805 are met.  Prior service may be creditable towards completion of a trial period, in accordance with HHS Instruction 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods.
Employees do not acquire competitive status based on their overseas limited appointment; however, an employee who has competitive status on the basis of a previous non-temporary competitive service appointment, retains status and may continue to compete for positions open to ‘status’ candidates. (Such employees should be advised to
provide a SF-50 showing they previously held a non-temporary competitive service position when applying to jobs.)
Use NOAC HNM, HRM, or H3M and cite Reg 301.201 or 301.202 when processing overseas limited appointment actions (see OPM GPPA, Chapter 10, Non-Status Appointments).
Detail or Transfer to an International Organization.  See Section 301-1-40 for definitions.
Detail.  OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads or written designee may authorize the detail of eligible employees (defined in (6)(d) below) only to international organizations approved by the Dept. of State (5 CFR §352.304), with the concurrence of OGA, prior to the effective date of the detail.  Requests are submitted to OGA by the servicing HR Center at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov. 
Transfer.  Upon the written request by an international organization for an employee’s services, an OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee may authorize the transfer of eligible employees (defined in (6)(d) below) to international organizations approved by the Dept. of State (5 CFR §§352.304 and 308), with the concurrence of the OGA prior to the effective date.  Requests are submitted to OGA by the servicing HR Center at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov.  A letter of consent with the effective date mutually agreed by the international organization and the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv is provided to the organization with a copy to the employee (5 CFR §352.308(b-c)). 
Eligible international organizations approved by Dept. of State for details and transfers under 5 CFR Part 352, Subpart C, are at https://iocareers.state.gov/Main/Content/Page/approved-international-organizations.  Requests to obtain Dept. of State approval for organizations not on approved list, should be sent to OGA at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov.
Eligible Employees.  All employees are eligible except the employees listed under 5 CFR §§352.305 and 307, i.e., a person serving on a temporary appointment; a seasonal, intermittent, or part-time appointment; a non-career, limited emergency, or limited term appointment in the Senior Executive Service (SES); a Presidential appointment; or a Schedule C appointment.
Time Limits (5 U.S.C. §§3343, 5 CFR §§352.302 and 352.308).
Employees who are detailed or transferred to international organizations may serve on those assignments for up to five (5) consecutive years. 
The Secretary of State, upon the recommendation of the Secretary of HHS, may approve an extension up to three (3) additional years if the extension is in the national interest.  Extension requests are submitted by the HR Center to OGA at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov, no later than three (3) months before the expiration of the current detail, and must include a justification why the extension request is needed; the extension request from the international organization; and the finance agreement between the OpDiv/StaffDiv and the international organization (see HHS Instruction, 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments, Reimbursable and Non-reimbursable Agreements).
Employees cannot serve longer than a total of eight (8) years on details or transfers to international organizations (or a combination of details and transfers) during their entire federal career. 
HHS employees remain in their official HHS position of record while on a detail to international organization and return to their official position of record at the expiration of the detail.  See Section 301-1-40 for definition.
HHS employees who are transferred to an international organization are entitled to retain coverage to their federal employee health benefits, retirement, and life insurance plans, and can elect to retain credit for accumulated leave at the time of transfer, in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3582(a) and (c).  Agency retirement and insurance contributions continue while the employee is transferred, as long as employee contributions continue (5 U.S.C. §3582(d)).  Employee and agency contributions to the Thrift Savings Plan (TSP) stop after separation, but make-up contributions are allowed in certain circumstances, see (C)(5) below.