Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 301-1, Overseas Employment
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 301-1, Overseas Employment, dated December 15, 2022.

Materials Superseded:
HHS Instruction 301-1, Overseas Employment, dated February 28, 2014

HHS Instruction, 352-1, Reemployment Rights, dated May 24, 1996

Memorandum from Assistant Secretary for Administration, Update to HHS Instruction 301-1, Overseas Employment, dated July 9, 2020

Memorandum from Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources, Update to HHS Instruction 301-1, Overseas Employment, dated June 12, 2020

All previous policy, guidance, standard operating procedures, and memos on overseas employment within HHS are cancelled by the issuance of this policy. 

Background:
This Instruction has been revised to update Department policy on overseas employment consistent with HHS and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) policy and guidance, and applicable laws and regulations.  HHS Operating and Staff Divisions (OpDivs/StaffDivs) are responsible for ensuring all overseas assignments adhere to this policy.  Employees should contact their servicing HR Center with any questions at https://intranet.hhs.gov/hr/contact-your-hr-center.

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out by OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, collective bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/                                                                                 
W. Robert Leavitt
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Chief Human Capital Officer

301-1-00 SECTIONS
301-1-10  Purpose
301-1-20  Coverage and Exclusions
301-1-30  References
301-1-40  Definitions
301-1-50  Responsibilities
301-1-60  Foreign Country Clearance
301-1-70  Tour of Duty
301-1-80  Recruitment and Staffing
301-1-90  Pay, Leave, and Benefits
301-1-100  Travel, Service Agreement, and Other Requirements
301-1-110  Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability

301-1-10 Purpose
This Instruction implements the Department of Health and Human Services (Department or HHS) policy, responsibilities, and procedures on overseas employment. 

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

301-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
The provisions of this Instruction apply to the employment of all civilian employees in the Department of Health and Human Services (Department or HHS) Operating and Staff Divisions (OpDiv/StaffDiv) who work in overseas locations.
This Instruction does not apply to officers of the U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) Commissioned Corps or to federal contractors.
The provisions of this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71 , and such actions require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees.  When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
301-1-30 References
5 United States Code (U.S.C.) §3343, Details to International Organizations
5 U.S.C. §§3581-3584, Reemployment After Service with An International Organization
5 U.S.C. Subchapter III (§§5921-5928), Overseas Differentials and Allowances
5 U.S.C. Chapter 63, Leave
22 U.S.C. §4081 et seq., Travel and related expenses (authorized for PHS by 42 U.S.C. §242l(c))
22 U.S.C. §4083, Required Leave (authorized for PHS by 42 U.S.C. §242l(c))
42 U.S.C. §242l(c), Benefits for Overseas Assignees 
5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 8, Appointments to Overseas Positions
5 CFR Part 301, Subpart B, Overseas Limited Appointment
5 CFR Part 301, Subpart C, Overseas (Local Hire) Employees Eligible for Noncompetitive Appointment Upon Return to the U.S.
5 CFR §315.608, Noncompetitive Appointment of Certain Former Overseas Employees
5 CFR 352, Subpart C, Detail and Transfer of Federal Employees to International Organizations
5 CFR Part 630, Absence and Leave
HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA) Assignments
HHS Instruction 590-1, Physician, Dentist, and Podiatrist Pay
HHS Travel Policy
Department of State Standardized Regulations (DSSR), overseas allowances and differentials under 5 U.S.C. §§5921-5925 and 5927
Memo from HHS Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources, Delegation of Human Resources Authorities, dated May 9, 2022.
301-1-40 Definitions
Days.  Calendar days.
Detail.  A temporary assignment to a different position for a specified period.  An employee who is on detail continues to occupy their official position of record while on detail and continues to receive pay and federal benefits associated with their permanent position.  At the expiration of the detail, the employee returns to his or her official position of record.  For complete information on details, see HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments.
Overseas Location.  Unless otherwise specified in this policy, overseas locations include foreign countries and other areas outside the continental U.S., but does not include Alaska, Guam, Hawaii, the Isthmus of Panama, Puerto Rico, or the Virgin Islands (5 CFR §§8.1, 8.4, and 210.102(9)). 
Transfer.  
A change of position by an employee from HHS to an international organization (5 U.S.C. §3581 and 5 CFR 352, Subpart C), ormovement of an employee, without a break in service of one (1) full workday, from a position in one agency to a position in another agency (5 CFR §210.102(18)).  See also OPM.gov/Details and Transfers.  
For overseas allowances and differentials in Section 301-1-90, ‘transfer’ is defined by the Dept. of State as a change in an employee’s duty location within HHS via an appointment, reassignment or other staffing action listed in Section 301-1-80 (DSSR Chapters 040, 241 and 251).  By DSSR definition, this excludes external transfers described in (D)(1) above and details since neither staffing action changes an employee’s duty location within HHS.  However, except for employees who are otherwise excluded by this policy in Section 301-1-90, the DSSR authorizes employees on a detail may be eligible for some overseas payments:  post hardship differentials, danger pay, and compensatory time (DSSR Chapters 511, 651 and 811 respectively).
