
Leave of Absence.  Public Health Service (PHS) employees on appointments with an overseas duty location may be required by their OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee to take a leave of absence upon completion of 12 months of continuous overseas service, and PHS employees shall be required to take a leave of absence as soon as possible after completion of three (3) years of continuous overseas service as described under 22 U.S.C. §4083 (42 U.S.C. §242l(c)).  In accordance with 22 U.S.C. §4083, employees may take the required leave anywhere in the U.S. or its territories, including American Samoa, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the U.S. Virgin Islands; or in cases where the employee is working at an unaccompanied overseas location, at home where their family resides (22 U.S.C. §4083(b)).  While on a leave of absence, the employee may be required to work, but such time is not counted as leave (22 U.S.C. §4083(c)). (For the purposes of this policy, ‘Department’ is defined as HHS, and ‘member of the Service’ is a PHS employee under 22 U.S.C. §4083.)
Benefits.  There is no impact on federal benefits (life and health insurance, retirement, Flexible Spending Accounts, Long Term Care Insurance, etc.) when a permanent HHS employee accepts a position with an overseas duty location.  Overseas employees who are U.S. citizens or nationals are eligible for all federal civil service benefits; however, benefits available to employees on time-limited appointments may vary depending on length of appointment.  Employees and HR staff should consult their servicing HR benefits officer with any questions.      
Medical evacuation and hospitalization coverage for overseas employees is explained in the ASA/Program Support Center’s HHS Travel Policy under International Requirements.
Workplace Flexibilities.  Employees who are working in an overseas location may be eligible for workplace flexibilities (e.g., telework, alternate work schedules, etc.) in accordance with HHS Instruction 990-1, Workplace Flexibilities. 
301-1-100 Travel, Service Agreement, and Other Requirements
Employees appointed to a position with an overseas duty location must sign a service agreement prior to departure or extension for a period equal to the length of the overseas assignment or be required to reimburse their employing OpDiv/StaffDiv for the cost of the assignment (e.g., travel, relocation, and per diem expenses, not including salary and benefits) if the employee does not fulfill the service agreement.  The OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee, in accordance with the HHS Delegation of HR Authorities, may waive this reimbursement and reason(s) must be documented.
Reimbursement of travel expenses for moves to/from an overseas assignment, including rates of per diem for employees and dependents, shipment of household effects, temporary duty allowances, etc. is paid in accordance with the HHS Travel Policy.  Travel and transportation questions should be directed to the ASA/Program Support Center. 
OpDivs/StaffDivs must follow the HHS Travel Policy for international travel requirements, including Passports; Visas; medical clearance and immunizations; completion of HHS Office of National Security safety/security briefings, and Dept. of State Foreign Service Institute training; overseas tour renewal travel (i.e., return home), etc. 
Public Health Service (PHS) employees working overseas are additionally authorized by 42 U.S.C. §242l(c) the following travel allowances and related expenses given to Dept. of State Foreign Service employees under 22 U.S.C. §§4081 and 4082.  (For the purposes of this policy, ‘Department’ is defined as HHS; ‘member of the Service’ is a PHS employee; and ‘Foreign Service post’ is an overseas duty location under 22 U.S.C. §§4081-82.)
Travel and Related Expenses.  In addition to the travel and related expenses authorized by the HHS Travel Policy, OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads or written designee may authorize the payment of costs and expenses listed under 22 U.S.C. §4081 incurred by PHS employees and their families. 
Basic Household Furnishings.  OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads or written designee may loan PHS employees on appointments with an overseas duty location basic household furnishings and equipment for use in personally owned or leased residences (22 U.S.C. §4082).
HHS employees on an overseas assignment are subject to the applicable ethics statutes and regulations including:  18 U.S.C. §§ 201-227  – Criminal Conflicts of Interest; 5 U.S.C. app.  – Ethics in Government Act of 1978; 5 U.S.C. §§ 7321-7326  and 5 CFR Part 734 – Hatch Act and implementing Political Activities Regulation; 5 U.S.C. § 7342  – Foreign Gifts and Decorations Act; 5 U.S.C. § 7353  – Gifts to Federal Employees; 41 U.S.C. §§ 2101-2107  – Ethics provisions of the Procurement Integrity Act; 5 CFR Part 735 – Employee Responsibilities and Conduct; 5 CFR Part 2634 – Executive Branch Financial Disclosure and Related Requirements; 5 CFR Part 2635 – Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch; 5 CFR Part 5501 – HHS Supplemental Standards of Ethical Conduct; and 5 CFR Part 5502 – HHS Supplemental Financial Disclosure Reporting Requirements. 

The servicing ethics office of the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv is responsible for communicating these requirements to their employee.  Questions should be directed to the servicing Deputy Ethics Counselor and/or Ethics Coordinator, a list of whom can be found at: /about/agencies/ogc/contact-ogc/agency-deputy-ethics-counselors-and-ethics-coordinators/index.html.
Employees are subject to the provisions of 5 U.S.C. Chapter 73, which regulates employee suitability, security, and conduct, including restrictions on political activity, and agency standards of conduct regulations.
HHS employees must also follow the Dept. of State Chief of Mission security policies when working overseas.  See Dept. of State’s Foreign Affairs Manual, Chief of Mission Authority, Security Responsibility and Overseas Staffing, June 10, 2020 for additional information.
301-1-110 Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability
Records associated with personnel actions, including service agreements, and all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) schedule.  Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years.  Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, or the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved and closed.
OpDivs/StaffDivs submit bi-annual overseas hiring plans to the Office of Global Affairs (OGA) no later than October 1 of each year at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov.  Questions concerning this reporting requirement should be directed to the OGA.
ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.