
301-1-50 Responsibilities
Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Establishes Department-wide HR policy and guidance in accordance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Submit requests to OPM for approval of an exception to the time limit for an overseas limited appointment.
Reviews and gives concurrence/non-concurrence to the HHS Office of Global Affairs on OpDiv/StaffDiv exemption requests to HHS’ six (6) year single country tour of duty limit in accordance with this policy.
Periodically reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv internal HR guidance, procedures, forms, reports, etc. to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Office of Global Affairs (OGA):
Serves as HHS’ liaison with the Department of State on overseas employment, including the preparation and submission of reports requested by the Dept. of State.
Approves/disapproves OpDiv/StaffDiv exemption requests to HHS’ six (6) year single country tour of duty limit after coordinating HR Center requests with ASA/OHR at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for concurrence.
Reviews and gives concurrence/non-concurrence on detail requests from the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or written designee to international organizations via 5 CFR Part 352.
Requests concurrence from the HHS Secretary to request Secretary of State approval to extend a detail to an international organization beyond five (5) years, in cases where the extension is in the national interest.  If the HHS Secretary concurs, submits request to the Dept. of State for approval.
Requests Dept. of State approval for international organizations not currently on the Dept. of State’s approved organization list, at the request of the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s servicing HR Centers.
Annually reviews the Dept. of State Difficult to Staff Posts designated list.  Based on this review, notifies OpDivs/StaffDivs the posts eligible for annual Difficult to Staff Incentive Differential (DSID) by October of each year.  Difficult to Staff Incentive is also referred to as a Service Need Differential (SND).   
Reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv bi-annual overseas hiring plans.
Develops supplemental HHS-wide overseas employment guidance, if necessary, with signed approval by the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources/Chief Human Capital Officer (DASHR/CHCO) prior to release at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov.  Supplemental travel guidance is coordinated with the ASA/Program Support Center to ensure consistency with HHS travel policy.
OpDivs/StaffDivs in coordination with their Human Resources Centers (HR Centers):
Comply with this Instruction, any applicable HHS, Dept. of State, and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Ensure internal guidance or standard operating procedures on overseas employment adhere to HHS policy.
Obtain foreign country clearance from the Dept. of State prior to employee travel.
Ensure employees complete and sign a service agreement prior to authorized travel.
Request OGA concurrence on details to international organizations via 5 CFR §352, Subpart C, prior to the effective date.
Request Dept. of State approval, via OGA, to approve international organizations who are not on Dept. of State’s approved organization list for details and transfers under 5 CFR §352, Subpart C.
Submit requests to extend details to international organization beyond five consecutive (5) years to OGA for review and submission to the HHS Secretary for concurrence and the Secretary of State for approval.
Submit bi-annual overseas hiring plans to OGA no later than October 1 of each year at os-oga-hhs-globalstaffing@hhs.gov. 
Authorize and grant DSID/SND based on the Difficult to Staff Posts list provided by OGA annually under Section 301-1-50(B)(6) of this Instruction.  Base SND/DSID decisions on written justification for employee nominations and recommend the positions, occupational specialties, and/or posts at which specific employees/positions may be eligible to receive the SND/DSID.
301-1-60 Foreign Country Clearance
The Dept. of State must give permission for any U.S. government employee to be in a foreign country on official business.  Dept. of State clearance is required before an employee works overseas regardless of timeframe or type of appointment (full-time, part-time, temporary, etc.).  Clearance is required in advance of travel to an overseas duty location.
OpDivs/StaffDivs submit clearance requests via Dept. of State’s electronic Country Clearance (eCC) system and provide a copy to the HHS Office of Global Affairs (OGA) at OSPassports@hhs.gov .  Cables may be used in cases where the request is classified, in accordance with the Dept. of State’s Foreign Affairs Manual, Chief of Mission Authority, Security Responsibility and Overseas Staffing, June 10, 2020.
OpDiv/StaffDiv requests for eCC access and questions on current Dept. of State clearance procedures may be sent to OGA at OSPassports@hhs.gov. 
Clearance for HHS employees who are transferred to work for an international organization (via 5 CFR 352, Subpart C) are managed by the international organization, not HHS.