
Documentation.
Details are documented in accordance with HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments, Section 300-3-90.
Transfers are documented in accordance with 5 CFR §352.308:
A letter of consent with an effective date mutually agreed by the international organization and the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv is provided to the organization with a copy to the employee;
A leave statement showing the employee’s annual and sick leave balances at the time of transfer is provided to the employee;
The notice of personnel action effecting the separation action must identify the international organization which the employee is transferring to; the period which the employee has reemployment rights (see (C)(5) in this Section below); and instructions for reemployment.
Details to international organizations may be reimbursable or non-reimbursable, in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3343(d-e).  Financial agreements must adhere to the legal and regulatory requirements described in HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments.
Transfers to international organizations are non-reimbursable, except agency retirement and insurance contributions outlined above.
Employees may submit an appeal to the Merit System Protection Board (MSPB) alleging an OpDiv/StaffDiv’s failure to comply with any of the provisions of 5 U.S.C. §§3343, 3581-3584 or of 5 CFR Part 352.
Recruitment of Non-U.S. Citizens via 5 CFR §8.3.  Non-U.S. citizens may be recruited overseas for a Title 5 excepted service position overseas.  The citizenship requirement for federal employment (Executive Order 11935), and the Consolidated Appropriations Act ban on payment of funds to non-U.S. citizens, do not apply to federal positions outside the continental U.S. 

Use NOAC BPM and cite 5 CFR §8.3 when processing actions (see OPM GPPA, Chapter 11, Excepted Service Appointments).
Employment After the Expiration of an Overseas Assignment.
With the exception of Details and Transfers to International Organizations (see (4) and (5) immediately below), HHS employees serving overseas are not entitled to continuation of employment after the expiration of their time-limited overseas assignment (see Section 301-1-70, Tour of Duty). 
Employees serving in overseas positions must compete for a vacancy in the U.S. via competitive examining, merit promotion, direct hire authority, excepted service recruitment, etc. following the rules of the applicable job opportunity announcement/hiring authority.  (See the citizenship requirement (7) at bottom of this Section.)
OpDivs/StaffDivs may at their discretion include a commitment in an employee’s service agreement to reassign or promote the employee after their overseas assignment ends to a competitive service position within their employing OpDiv/StaffDiv that has no greater promotion potential than the employee holds or previously held within the competitive service on a permanent basis. 
This option is available when the Division’s servicing HR Center has a documented Merit Promotion (MP) Plan in place that includes the requirements listed under 5 CFR §335.103 and has identified such reassignments and/or promotions as discretionary actions in its MP plan.  See also discretionary actions under (B)(3) above. 
This option is not available for employees serving on either a temporary or term overseas appointment under 5 CFR Part 316 and the employee has not previously held a permanent competitive service position prior to accepting the temporary or term overseas appointment.  Employees do not acquire competitive service status based on a temporary or term appointment and these time-limited appointments end automatically at the expiration date.  Such employees need to compete for a vacancy and be selected prior to their expiration date to avoid separation or a break in service.
This option is not available for employees serving on an excepted service, SES, or Scientific or Senior Level (ST/SL) overseas position and the employee has not previously held a competitive service position on a permanent basis.  If the employee has previously held a competitive service position on a permanent basis, they can be placed via merit promotion procedures into a competitive service position that has no greater promotion potential than the employee previously held on a permanent basis in the competitive service.  Prior to placement, HR Centers must verify status via a SF-50 showing the employee previously held a competitive service position on a permanent basis.
Details to International Organizations (5 U.S.C. §3443), see (B)(6) above.  Employees remain in their official HHS position of record while on a detail to an international organization and return to their official position of record at the expiration of the detail, see Section 301-1-40 for definition.
Transfers to International Organizations (5 U.S.C. §§3581-3584), see also (B)(6) above.  Employees who are transferred to international organizations approved by the Dept. of State are entitled to reemployment after their employment with the international organization ends either to their former HHS position or to a position of like seniority, status and pay within their former employing OpDiv/StaffDiv (5 U.S.C. §§3581-3584 and 5 CFR §§352.311-313):
The employee must apply for reemployment no later than 90 days after separation from the international organization;
The separation is either voluntarily or involuntarily, without cause; and
The international transfer must not exceed the time limits described under (B)(6)(e) above.
If (a)-(c) immediately above are met, the former employee must be reemployed within 30 days of receiving the former employee’s reemployment application.  (If the former employee applies before separation from the international organization, the 30-day period begins either on the date of application, or 30 days before the separation date from the international organization, whichever is later.)
The application must be in writing, in any format of the HR Center’s choosing.  The international organization’s separation notice must be included.
Reemployment instructions for former SES employees can be found at 5 CFR §352.311(c).
Upon reemployment, the employee is entitled to the rate of basic pay which the employee would have been entitled had the employee remained with the employing agency; and
The employee is entitled to restoration of any sick leave.
An employee who elected to retain federal retirement coverage and continued to make all required employee contributions while employed with the international organization, may make make-up contributions to the TSP which were missed due to federal separation.  The employee also receives make-up agency contributions and lost earnings on the agency contributions, consistent with the TSP rules. 
The period between separation and reemployment is creditable service for all employment purposes.  
If the OpDiv/StaffDiv fails to reemploy their former employee within 30 days of receiving their application, the servicing HR Center must notify the employee, in writing, of the reasons and their right to appeal to the MSPB.  The HR Center must follow the notice of appeal rights procedures under 5 CFR §1201.21.
If the OpDiv/StaffDiv fails to reach and issue a decision to the employee within 30 days of receiving their application, the former employee is entitled to appeal the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s failure to issue a reemployment decision to the MSPB.
Non-competitive appointment for family members of certain overseas employees upon return to the U.S. (5 CFR Part 301, Subpart C, and §315.608).
An HHS employee’s family member who has served of creditable overseas service (as defined in 5 CFR §315.608(b)) may be eligible to be noncompetitively appointed to a competitive service position in the U.S. (including Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands) at any series or grade the family member is qualified for. 
The overseas position in which the family member served must have been recruited overseas among people residing in the overseas area and must have been non-permanent;
The family member received a performance rating of fully successful or higher;
The family member must have lived in an overseas area at the time of the HHS employee’s overseas appointment;
The family member is eligible for three (3) years from the date of return to the U.S. to reside (may be extended for specific reasons listed under 5 CFR §315.608(d)); and
The family member must meet all appointment criteria, such as U.S. citizenship.
For definitions, including family member and creditable overseas service, see 5 CFR §315.608.
