Instruction 302-1: Employment in the Excepted Service
Issuance Date: 10/30/2020

Material Transmitted:
HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service dated 10/30/2020.

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service dated 04/08/2020.

Background:
This Instruction has been revised to comply with regulatory changes to 5 CFR Part 302, published on November 6, 2020.

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/

J. Blair Duncan
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Chief Human Capital Officer

Subject: Employment in the Excepted Service
302-1-00 Purpose
302-1-10 References
302-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
302-1-30 Definitions
302-1-40 Responsibilities
302-1-50 General
302-1-60 Classification, Qualifications & Recruitment
302-1-70 Priority Consideration Candidates
302-1-80 Assessment and Selection Procedures
302-1-90 Other Actions And Appointment Time Limits
302-1-100 Appeals
302-1-110 Personnel Actions
302-1-120 Documentation and Accountability

302-1-00 Purpose
This Instruction sets forth policy requirements relating to employment in the excepted service and applies to excepted positions that are subject to the provisions of Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.), or subject to a statutory requirement to follow the veterans’ preference provisions of Title 5.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

302-1-10 References
5 U.S.C §2103, The excepted service
5 U.S.C §2108, Veteran; disabled veteran; preference eligible
5 U.S.C §2301, Merit system principles
5 U.S.C §3320, Excepted service; government of the District of Columbia; selection
5 U.S.C §7511(a)(1)(B)-(C), Employee definition for Adverse Actions
5 U.S.C §8101(1), Employee definition for Compensation for Work Injuries
5 CFR Part 6, Exceptions from the Competitive Service (Rule VI)
5 CFR Part 211, Veteran Preference
5 CFR Part 213, Excepted Service
5 CFR §300.301, Details of Employees
5 CFR Part 302, Employment in the Excepted Service
5 CFR Part 362, Pathways Programs
Office of Personnel Management (OPM), Vet Guide, Veterans’ Preference in Appointments, Excepted Service Employment
HHS Instruction, 300-3, Details and IPA Agreements
HHS Instruction, 330-2, Priority Placement Programs
302-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
A. Coverage

This Instruction covers all excepted positions that are subject to the provisions of Title 5, or subject to a statutory requirement to follow the veterans’ preference provisions of Title 5, including:

Positions filled via government-wide Schedule A and B authorities, unless 5 CFR §302.101(c)  exempts the specific Schedule A or B positions from 5 CFR Part 302 appointment procedures.
Positions filled via HHS-specific Schedule A and Schedule B authorities, unless OPM exempts in writing the Schedule A or B authority from 5 CFR Part 302 appointment procedures at the time of approval.
Positions filled under Schedule D, Pathways Programs (5 CFR §362.105(c)(2)).
B. Exclusions

Positions or appointments that are required by the Congress to be confirmed by, or made with the advice and consent of, the Senate (5 CFR §302.101(b) ).
Positions exempt from the 5 CFR Part 302 appointment procedures when the positions are specifically listed under 5 CFR §302.101(c) . Operating Divisions/Staff Divisions (OpDiv/StaffDiv, or Division) must develop written hiring procedures for such positions and apply them uniformly in accordance with the requirements under 5 CFR §302.101(c) , the merit system principles, and applicable HHS guidance. OpDivs/StaffDivs should consult their legal counsel on their internal procedures prior to implementation to ensure they are legally supportable and not in conflict with current case law, rule, law, regulation, or other legal authority.
Non-Title 5 excepted authorities, if the authority’s provisions specifically exempt the positions from Title 5 in part (i.e., appointment or hiring procedures), or completely (i.e., all Title 5 provisions).
C. Bargaining Unit Employees

The provisions of this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees (e.g., the filling of a position within the scope of the bargaining unit, promotion and reassignments, and adverse actions) are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71 . Therefore, when the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.

302-1-30 Definitions
Excepted position. A position in the excepted service.
Excepted Service. Positions not in the competitive service or the Senior Executive Service; includes all positions in the Executive Branch of the Federal Government which are specifically excepted from the requirements of the competitive service by statute, Executive Order, or by OPM regulation.
Preference Eligible. Veterans who are disabled or who served on active duty in the Armed Forces during certain specified periods or in military campaigns, veterans discharged due to sole survivorship, or family members entitled to derived preference. Preference eligible candidates are generally entitled to preference over non-veterans for new appointments in both the competitive and excepted service and in retention during a reduction in force (5U.S.C §2108 ).
Priority Reemployment List (PRL). A list executive agencies must establish to give reemployment consideration and placement assistance to former HHS excepted service employees who have been furloughed or separated by RIF or compensable injury; or who appealed an adverse action to the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) and was found to have been unjustifiably dismissed from the agency but is not entitled to immediate restoration under the MSPB’s decision (5 CFR §302.303).
Reemployment List (RL). A discretionary executive agency list to give employment consideration to current and former HHS excepted service employees who are not eligible for inclusion on the HHS PRL. A RL is discretionary under 5 CFR §302.303(c)  and is not established by HHS.
