Promotions.
The merit system principles apply to promotions within the excepted service; therefore, the employee must compete/have competed for the proposed position/grade level(s) otherwise the action is a prohibited personnel practice (5 U.S.C. §§2301 and 2302).
Promotions within the excepted service are not subject to the time-in-grade restrictions outlined in 5 CFR Part 300, Subpart F ; however, employees must meet the qualification requirements for the position (series and grade). Time-in-grade restrictions outlined in 5 CFR Part 300, Subpart F, apply to movement to or within the competitive service; therefore, while promotions within the excepted service are not subject to time-in-grade; promotions upon non-competitive conversion to the competitive service (for excepted service authorities that authorize non-competitive conversion) are subject to time-in-grade restrictions.
The requirements such as age, height, and weight in determining qualifications for a promotion for a preference eligible are waived unless the qualification(s) is/are essential to the performance of the duties of the position (5 CFR §302.403 ).
The physical requirements of a position in cases of promotion are waived if, in the opinion of the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv, and after considering the recommendation of an accredited physician, the preference eligible is physically able to perform the duties of the position (5 CFR §302.403 ).
Reappointments. OpDivs/StaffDivs may reappoint a current or former non-temporary federal employee who is a preference eligible to a vacant HHS position without regard to the names of qualified applicants on HHS’ PRL or a regular employment list (5 CFR §302.402 ).
Appointment Time Limits. The time limits described under 5 CFR §213.104 for temporary, time-limited, intermittent, or seasonal excepted appointments are followed.
302-1-100 Appeals
Excepted service employees who meet the definition of ‘employee’ under 5 U.S.C §7511(a)(1)(B)-(C)  are generally entitled to appeal rights to the MSPB. Servicing Employee Relations staff should be consulted when dealing with unacceptable performance and/or employee misconduct to ensure actions are in compliance with law, regulations, HHS policy, and applicable collective bargaining agreement(s).
Individuals entitled to priority consideration who are preference eligibles, or suffered a compensable injury, have appeal rights to the MSPB if they believe their reemployment rights were violated (5 CFR §§302.103; 302.304(a) and 302.501).
302-1-110 Personnel Actions
OPM’s Guide to Processing Personnel Actions, Chapter 11, Excepted Service Appointments, is used when processing personnel actions, and the specific law/statute, Executive Order (E.O.), or Schedule (A. B, C, etc.) authority that authorizes the appointment must be cited.
Tenure is assigned following guidance in OPM’s Guide to Data Standards. Generally, time- limited or temporary appointments are Tenure Code 3; individuals serving trial periods are assigned Tenure Code 2; and employees who have completed trial periods and are on permanent appointments are Tenure Code 1.
302-1-120 Documentation and Accountability
Records associated with hiring actions should be retained in individual recruitment case files to allow for third-party reconstruction. Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule. Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed.
HHS OHR will conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.