302-1-40 Responsibilities
A. HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (HHS OHR):

Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding excepted service employment consistent with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations;
Submits requests to OPM for pass over and objections that require OPM approval;
Submits requests to OPM for approval to detail an excepted service employee, covered under 5 CFR §300.301(c) , to the competitive service; and
Periodically reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv excepted service procedures, actions, qualification standards, and reports to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
B. OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Centers (HR Centers):

Comply with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations;
Establish written procedures regarding the acceptance, rating and ranking, and selection of applications, as required by 5 CFR §§302.301 and 302.302(a) and this Instruction, ensuring procedures are applied uniformly and excepted service positions are filled in accordance with the merit system principles and veterans’ preference laws and regulations;
Ensure that applicants are notified of excepted service vacancies so that applicants have a reasonable opportunity to apply. If job opportunity announcements (JOAs) are used, include a reasonable accommodation statement (5 CFR §302.106 );
Document reasons to use ranked or unranked evaluation procedures and make such information available to an applicant upon his or her request (5 CFR §302.302(a));
Ensure that pass over/objection requests that require OPM approval are submitted to HHS OHR for review/concurrence and submission to OPM;
Approve or deny pass over/objection requests that do not require OPM approval, and provide to HHS OHR, upon request, a periodic report of all actions taken. This approval may not be redelegated below the OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources (HR) Director level;
Ensure reasons are documented for non-selection of a veteran preference or priority consideration eligible;
Ensure eligible former excepted service employees are entered on HHS’s PRL via HHS’ web-based system identified for this purpose; and the HHS PRL is checked for qualified candidates prior to filling excepted service positions, in accordance with this Instruction, HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, and 5 CFR §302.304(a).
Ensure that requests to detail excepted service employees to the competitive service, who are covered by 5 CFR §300.301(c) , are forwarded to HHS OHR for review/concurrence and submission to OPM in accordance with HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments;
Obtain a written statement from a non-temporary competitive service candidate acknowledging that s(he) is voluntarily leaving the competitive service to accept the position in the excepted service (5 CFR §302.102(b) ); and
Maintain documentation related to each recruitment when filling excepted service positions so recruitment actions can be reconstructed by a third party.
302-1-50 General
Excepted service positions are authorized by law or statute, by the President via Executive Order (E.O.), or by OPM regulation (i.e., Schedules A, B, C, or D). Government-wide excepted authorities/positions approved by OPM are described under 5 CFR Part 213.
Excepted service positions may or may not be subject to the provisions of Title 5. Unless the authority (i.e., law/statute, E.O. or OPM approval/regulations) provisions specifically exempt the positions from Title 5 appointment procedures, the excepted service hiring procedures under 5 CFR Part 302  and this Instruction apply.
Regardless of hiring authority, excepted positions are not subject to the appointment rules/regulations of the competitive service.
302-1-60 Classification, Qualifications & Recruitment
Classification. Unless specifically exempted by the applicable excepted authority, excepted service positions covered under this Instruction are classified using the OPM Position Classification Standards.
Qualification Standards. Unless specifically exempted by the applicable excepted authority or the existence of valid HHS-specific qualification standards, OPM’s Qualification Standards apply. OpDiv/StaffDiv-developed qualification standards for positions covered under this Instruction must adhere to the requirements under 5 CFR §302.202 ; be validated by an Industrial Organizational (I/O) Psychologist or reviewed by legal counsel to ensure they are legally supportable; and reviewed by HHS OHR for conformity to regulatory requirements prior to use. HR Centers maintain a permanent record of such approved qualification standards, and provide information about such standards to an applicant upon his/her request.
Recruitment Methods. Unless required by statutory or federal regulatory authority (e.g., Pathways Programs), vacancies for excepted service positions are not required to be posted on USAJOBS. However, the merit system principles apply to excepted service recruitment; therefore, HR Centers must use recruitment methods that notify applicants of excepted service vacancies within their Division so that interested applicants have a reasonable opportunity to apply. HR Centers must document their recruitment procedures and the acceptance of excepted service applications (5 U.S.C. §§2301 and 5 CFR §302.301 ).
Notification options, include, but are not limited to, notice on the HHS or OpDiv/StaffDiv’s website of existing or future excepted service vacancies; notices provided at job fairs; or a traditional JOA;
OpDivs/StaffDivs must consider whether their method of recruitment and time allowed provides for fair and open competition, attracts a sufficient pool of qualified candidates, and ensures potential applicants will receive fair and equitable treatment;
Applications are accepted from ‘Current Federal Employees,’ ‘Former Federal Employees,’ ‘Internal Employees/Agency Employees’ or ‘U.S. Citizens.’
Under no circumstances should an excepted service JOA be restricted to ‘Status Candidates’ since excepted employees do not acquire competitive status unless they have previously held a non-temporary competitive service position.
Applications from persons with disabilities (Schedule A, 5 CFR §213.3102(u)) may be accepted.
OpDivs/StaffDivs may use the following options to manage application volume for positions that attract a high number of applicants. OpDiv/StaffDiv procedures for receiving applications must address the use of these options (5 CFR §302.301 ). When one or more of the limitations are used, the limitations must be stated in the JOA, advertisement, or notice and justification included in the recruitment case file.
Limiting the number of days a JOA is open: OpDivs/StaffDivs have the discretion to determine the length of time that a JOA is open. When doing so, organizations should give consideration to the types, grade levels, and geographic locations of the positions being filled; and ensure the time allowed provides for fair and open competition that ensures potential applicants have reasonable opportunity to apply consistent with the merit system principles.
Limiting the number of applications received: OpDivs/StaffDivs have the discretion to set “cut-offs” or limits (e.g., the first 100 applications received) on the number of applications that they will consider when filling a position. When using such limits, HR Centers shall accept any application received up until 11:59 p.m. on the day the limit is reached in order to accommodate applicants in non-Eastern time zones.
Veterans Preference. OpDivs/StaffDivs must ensure veterans’ preference provisions are applied in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3320 ; 5 CFR Part 211; and this Instruction when filling excepted service positions. HR Centers shall request additional information from applicants when there is conflicting documentation in their application package concerning their claimed veterans’ preference. For example, in cases where the applicant submits supporting evidence that shows they are entitled to veterans’ preference, but also provides contradictory evidence that shows they are not entitled to veterans’ preference they are claiming, HR Specialists must request additional information, as necessary, to ensure veterans’ preference is adjudicated properly.
