Selection.
OpDivs/StaffDivs must adhere to the selection procedures under 5 CFR §302.401(a) , or follow its alternate rating and selection procedures (such as category grouping), when making selections from priority reemployment or regular certificates. The Indian Health Service must give selection priority in accordance with 25 U.S.C. §5117, prior to applying the veterans’ preference provisions under 5 CFR Part 302.
Selections under 5 CFR §302.401(a) :
When numerical ratings are assigned, selections are made from the highest three candidates listed in Order A, i.e., preference eligibles who have a compensable service-connected disability of 10 percent or more, followed by all other qualified candidates, in the order of their numerical ratings, with preference eligibles listed ahead of non-preference eligibles with the same ratings (5 CFR §211.102(d)(3)).
When numerical ratings are not assigned, selections are made from the highest preference category, as long as at least three candidates are in that group. When fewer than three candidates are in the highest preference category, consideration may be expanded to include the next highest preference category.
Selections under OpDiv/StaffDiv alternate rating and selection procedures:
Documented alternate rating and selection procedures must be applied uniformly.
If making selections under category rating-like (e.g., category grouping) procedures, OpDivs/StaffDivs must select from the highest quality category (i.e., any preference eligible within the highest quality category may be selected; veterans have selection preference over non-veterans; preference eligibles with a 10% or more disability are placed in the highest quality category ahead of the non-preference eligibles, except for scientific or professional positions at the GS- 9 level or higher).
Selection of Competitive Service Candidate. A written statement must be obtained from a non-temporary competitive service candidate, acknowledging s(he) is voluntarily leaving the competitive service to accept the position in the excepted service (5 CFR §302.102(b) ). Such employees generally do not lose appeal rights, see Section 302-1-100 of this Instruction. In addition, employees who previously held a non-temporary competitive service position retain their competitive service status and may continue to apply to competitive service positions open to ‘status’ candidates. (Employees should be advised to provide a SF-50 showing they previously held a non-temporary competitive service position when applying to jobs.) Excepted employees who have never served in a non-temporary competitive service position are eligible to apply only to competitive service announcements open to all candidates or U.S. Citizens.
Pass Overs and Objections of Preference Eligibles (5 CFR 302.401(b) and OPM Delegated Examining Operations Handbook).
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Directors may approve or deny pass over requests of less than 30 percent compensable disabled veterans for excepted service positions and document reason(s) for selecting a non-preference eligible. This approval may not be redelegated below the HR Director level.
The following pass over and objection requests require OPM approval before making selections for excepted service positions covered under this Instruction:
A pass over of any preference eligible with a 30 percent or more compensable service connected disability (5 U.S.C §3318 );
A pass over of a preference eligible based on medical qualifications (5 CFR§§339 ); and
Suitability determinations involving material, intentional false statement, deception or fraud in examination or appointment, or refusal to furnish testimony as required by 5 CFR §731.103(a) .
Pass over requests requiring OPM approval must be sent to the HHS OHR for review and concurrence. OHR will send the request to OPM if it concurs with the request. HR Centers must submit the following documentation to HHS OHR:
Completed SF-62, Agency Request to Passover a Preference Eligible or Object to an Eligible, www.opm.gov/Forms/pdf_fill/SF62.pdf - PDF;
Resume/Application package to include title, series, and grade;
Copy of Position Description;
Copy of Vacancy Announcement;
Certificate of Eligibles; and
A memorandum approved by the HR Director with a description of the reason sufficient to sustain an objection/pass over.
No correspondence is sent to a 30 percent or more compensable disabled applicant until HHS OHR concurrence is received. Only after OPM has approved the pass over of the preference eligible may the 30 percent or more compensable disabled veteran be passed over and another applicant selected.
OpDivs/StaffDivs should be mindful of 5 U.S.C. §3320  and 5 CFR §332.406  when considering reasons for passing over a preference eligible, and consult with their legal counsel, if necessary, on whether the justification is likely to meet the standard of making selections in the same manner and under the same conditions required for the competitive service, as required by 5 U.S.C. §3320 .
302-1-90 Other Actions And Appointment Time Limits
Details. Details of employees in the excepted service are made in accordance with the rules under 5 CFR §300.301 , and HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments.
Reassignments. Individuals reassigned to another position without promotion or change to lower grade, level or band must meet the qualification requirements described in 302-1-60 B. of this Instruction for the excepted service position (series and grade).
