302-1-70 Priority Consideration Candidates
OpDivs/StaffDivs must provide reemployment consideration to former HHS excepted service employees registered on HHS’ Priority Reemployment List (PRL) when filling excepted service positions (HHS Instruction, 330-2, Priority Placement Programs), following the assessment and selection procedures described in this Instruction.
Qualified candidates on HHS’ PRL must be given selection priority before referring the names of other qualified candidates (5 CFR 302.304(a) ).
OpDivs/StaffDivs may appoint a candidate who is not a PRL eligible, or a PRL eligible who has a lower standing on the PRL list, when the PRL eligible(s) qualifications will create an undue interruption to the position. The HR Center must notify each PRL eligible of the reasons for non-selection and must also notify any preference eligible(s) on the PRL list of their right to appeal to the MSPB (5 CFR 302.304(a)). This documentation must be maintained in the recruitment case file.
Once an HR Center fulfills these requirements, other excepted service candidates may be considered for the position.
HR Centers must retain sufficient documentation to demonstrate PRL clearance for each excepted service vacancy.
302-1-80 Assessment and Selection Procedures
OpDivs/StaffDivs must follow the provisions of 5 CFR Parts 211  and 302  relating to the examination, rating, and selection of an applicant, when a qualified preference eligible, non- preference eligible, or person entitled to priority consideration applies for appointment to a position covered by this Instruction.
OpDivs/StaffDivs must use job related assessment methods to evaluate candidates; document its assessment and selection procedures; apply them uniformly; and furnish applicants information on such procedures and their ratings upon request in accordance with 5 CFR Part 302, Subpart C .
Veterans’ preference is granted as follows (5 CFR §302.201 ):
When eligible candidates are referred without numerical ratings, preference is noted as:
‘CP’ for preference eligibles having compensable service connected disability of 10% or more (5 U.S.C. §2108(3)(C));
‘XP’ for all other candidates eligible for 10-point veteran preference (5 U.S.C.§2108(3)(D-G) ;
‘TP’ for candidates eligible for 5-point veteran preference (5 U.S.C. §2108(3)(A-B)); and
‘SSP’ for candidates eligible for sole survivorship preference (5 U.S.C. §2108(3)(H)).
When numerical ratings are used, 10 additional points are given to preference eligibles described under 1. a. and b. above; 5 additional points are granted to preference eligibles described under 1. c. above; and 0 additional points are given to sole survivorship preference eligibles.
Assessment. OpDivs/StaffDivs may evaluate candidates based on eligibility/ineligibility determinations, numerical scores, or a category rating-like process (5 CFR §302.302 ).
Alternate rating and selection procedures may be developed, such as procedures similar to category rating (e.g., category grouping), to fill excepted service positions, as long as the procedures give preference and priority consideration eligibles at least as much advantage as they would receive under the 5 CFR Part 302  hiring procedures (5 U.S.C§3320 ; 5 CFR §302.105 ). Such procedures must be documented and applied uniformly across similar/same types of positions.
Reasons are documented for using a ranked or unranked referral lists (5 CFR§302.302(a)) and the quality ranking factors used, if using numerical rating or category grouping.
Numerical ratings are assigned on a scale of 100, with each qualified candidate assigned a rating of 70 or more (plus any additional veteran preference points). Numerical ratings are not required when all qualified applicants will be offered immediate employment (5 CFR §302.302(b)).
When there is a high volume of applicants, ratings are only required for a sufficient number of the highest-qualified applicants to meet the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s needs within a reasonable time; however, preference eligible candidates are still considered in the order they would have been considered if all applicants had been assigned ratings (5 CFR§302.302(b)).
Certificates and Order of Consideration. Qualified candidates are placed on a certificate in the following order (5 CFR §211.102(d)(3) ; 5 CFR §302.303(d) ; 5 CFR §302.304 ):
Priority reemployment candidates. Qualified candidates on HHS’s PRL must be given selection priority before other candidates can be referred, in accordance with 5 CFR §302.304(a) , and are placed on a PRL certificate in one of the orders listed in 2. below.
Other candidates are considered in one of the following orders:
When candidates are rated only for basic eligibility:
Qualified preference eligibles that have a compensable, service-connected disability of 10% or more;
All other qualified candidates eligible for 10-point veteran preference;
All qualified candidates eligible for 5-point veteran preference;
All qualified candidates eligible for sole survivorship; and lastly
Qualified candidates not eligible for veteran preference.
When candidates have been assigned numerical ratings:
Qualified preference eligibles having a compensable, service-connected disability of 10% or more, in order of the augmented ratings; and
All other qualified candidates in the order of their augmented ratings. At each score, qualified candidates eligible for 10-point preference are entered ahead of those eligible for 5-point preference, followed by sole survivorship preference eligibles, then lastly qualified non-preference eligible candidates.
When candidates have the same numerical ratings, preference eligibles are listed ahead of non-preference eligibles (5 CFR §211.102(d)(3) ).
For professional and scientific positions at the GS-9 grade level and above:
If numerical ratings are assigned, applicants are considered in the order of their scores, augmented for veterans’ preference. When candidates have the same numerical ratings, preference eligibles are listed ahead of non-preference eligibles (5 CFR §211.102(d)(3) ); or
If numerical scores have not been assigned, all preference eligibles are considered together regardless of the type of preference, followed by other candidates.
Order specified in the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s alternate rating and selection procedures, in accordance with 5 CFR §302.105, and the assessment procedures above.