
304-1-80 Personnel Actions
When processing personnel actions, OPM’s Guide to Processing Personnel Actions (GPPA), Chapter 11, Excepted Service Appointments, is used (Authority Code, H2L; and Legal Authority, Reg. 304.103).
Authority code ‘ZLM’ is also cited with the applicable Appropriations Act or statute that authorizes the appointment under 5 U.S.C. §3109 (see Coverage and References), in accordance with the GPPA:  
ZLM and the Appropriations Act that authorizes the OpDiv/StaffDiv to appoint and pay experts and consultants under 5 U.S.C. §3109; and additionally
(For AHRQ, NIH, and SAMHSA as of the date of this policy) ZLM and the Title 42 statute that authorizes the OpDiv/StaffDiv to appoint a specific number of experts and consultants without regard to 5 U.S.C. §3109 appointment time limits.
Position title is “Expert” or “Consultant.”  Series “0000” and no General Schedule grade are assigned.  (5 CFR §304.103(a)(1))
The ED, EF, or EH pay plan is used for Experts and Consultants covered under this policy in accordance with the OPM’s Data Standards.  
Tenure is assigned in accordance with OPM’s Data Standards. Generally, time-limited, or temporary appointments are Tenure Code 3.
Remark code E21 should be used for individuals who are designated ‘special government employees,’ as defined under 18 U.S.C. §202.  Questions regarding this ethics designation should be directed to an OpDiv/StaffDiv’s servicing ethics office.  A list of servicing Deputy Ethics Counselors and Ethics Coordinators can be found at https://www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/ogc/contact-ogc/agency-deputy-ethics-counselors-and-ethics-coordinators/index.html.
304-1-90 Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability
Documentation.  
To justify an appointment under 5 U.S.C. §3109, OpDivs/StaffDivs should record:
Name of employee;
Resume;
Rate of pay or signed compensation waiver;
Type of appointment (Temporary or Intermittent Expert or Consultant appointment);
If temporary, work schedule (full-time, part-time, seasonal, or intermittent);
Proposed length of appointment;
Description of duties to be performed;
Justification for appointing an expert of consultant and explanation how the individual meets the definition of an “expert” or “consultant;” and
Certification by the expert or consultant’s supervisor or manager that:
The appointment will not be used to appoint the individual to a position requiring Presidential appointment, or to a Senior Executive Service position;
The individual is not/will not perform managerial or supervisory work;
The individual is not being appointed to do work being performed by the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s regular employees;
The appointment will not be used to fill in during staff shortages; and
The appointment is not being made in anticipation of giving that person a career appointment (5 CFR §304.103(b)).
To justify a reappointment, OpDivs/StaffDivs should record: 
Explanation of the continuing need for the appointment and the services of the individual;
Whether the duties are the same or demonstrably different from the current or previous expert/consultant appointment;
Which reappointment option under 5 CFR §304.103(c) the OpDiv/StaffDiv has elected and the reasons for selecting that option; and
The number of days or hours worked in a service year (defined under Definitions), or cumulative earnings from expert/consultant employment.
Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained for a total of three (3) full years after completion of the expert or consultant appointment. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes or subject to a litigation hold may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, the Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed.
Annual Reporting.  OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers are required to report at the beginning of each calendar year the following information to ASA/OHR at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for each paid expert and consultant appointed in accordance with the provisions of 5 U.S.C. §3109 and on board during the preceding calendar year (5 U.S.C. §3109 and 5 CFR §304.107):
Employee Name;
Expert or Consultant Appointment;
Temporary or Intermittent employment;
Total pay (excluding travel) for the preceding calendar year; and
Total days worked for the preceding calendar year.
ASA/OHR will email an annual reminder about this reporting requirement.

Accountability. ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Endnotes
1 Maximum EX-IV pay level.  See Section 304-1-60, Compensation.