
SEC. 503.  Appropriations contained in this Act or subsequent Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Acts, available for salaries and expenses, shall be available for services as authorized by 5 U.S.C. §3109 but at rates for individuals not to exceed the per diem rate equivalent to the maximum rate payable for senior-level positions under 5 U.S.C. §5376. 1
42 U.S.C. §282d, Director National Institutes of Health, Services of experts or consultants 
42 U.S.C. §285a–2(b)(5), Special Authorities of Director [National Cancer Institute] 
42 U.S.C. §290aa(h), Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, Services of Experts 
42 U.S.C. §299c-5(f), Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, Certain Administrative Authorities, Experts 
5 U.S.C. §3109, Employment of Experts and Consultants; temporary or intermittent 
5 U.S.C. §5533(d)(1), Dual Pay for More than One Position; Exceptions 
5 CFR Part 304, Expert and Consultant Appointments
OPM Fact Sheet:  Expert and Consultant Pay
304-1-30 Definitions
Advisory committee member.  Is appointed as an expert or consultant pursuant to 5 U.S.C. §3109 to serve on a federal advisory committee per Appointment of Consultants to FACA | GSA.  The requirements in this Instruction apply to these appointments. 
Agency.   HHS (5 U.S.C. §105 and 5 CFR §304.102(a)).   
Consultant.  A person who can provide valuable and pertinent advice generally drawn from a high degree of broad administrative, professional, or technical knowledge or experience (5 CFR §304.102(b)).
Expert.  A person who is specially qualified by education and experience to perform difficult and challenging tasks in a particular field beyond the usual range of achievement of competent persons in that field.  An expert is regarded by other persons in the field as an authority or practitioner of unusual competence and skill in a professional, scientific, technical or other activity (5 CFR §304.102(d)).
Intermittent employment.  Employment without a regularly scheduled tour of duty (5 CFR §304.102(f)).
Service year.  The calendar year that begins on the date of the individual's initial appointment in the agency (5 CFR §304.103(c)(2)(i)).
Temporary employment.  Employment not to exceed one (1) year.  An expert or consultant serving under a temporary appointment may have a full-time, part-time, seasonal, or intermittent work schedule (5 CFR §304.102(g)).
Employment without compensation.  Unpaid (not volunteer) service that is provided at the agency’s request to perform duties that are unclassified.  Unpaid employees must agree in advance in writing to waive any claim for compensation for their services (5 CFR §§304.102(h) and 304.104(c)).
304-1-40 Responsibilities
 HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Establishes Department-wide human resources policy and guidance consistent with HHS and Office of Personnel Management (OPM) policy, procedures guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Submits requests to OPM for approval of reappointments that are an exception to the limits outlined in 5 CFR §304.103(c), when necessitated by unforeseen or unusual circumstances.
Submits a Department-wide annual report to OPM, as required by law and regulation.
Periodically reviews Operating Division and Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv) Expert and Consultant appointments to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Centers (HR Centers):
Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy, procedures guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Ensure the need for experts and consultants, or continuing need in cases of reappointment, is appropriately justified and documented.
Set and adjust pay in accordance with law, regulation, this Instruction, and OPM’s Fact Sheet: Expert and Consultant Pay; or, when applicable, obtain and maintain an expert/consultant’s written compensation waiver pursuant to 5 CFR §304.104(c).
Ensure HR staff receive training and information to ensure that officials and employees using the authority understand the statutory and regulatory requirements, in accordance with 5 CFR §304.108(a)(1).
Ensure an annual review of, and report on, expert and consultant appointments to ensure compliance with 5 U.S.C. §3109, 5 CFR Part 304, and this Instruction.
304-1-50 Appointment and Reappointment
Individuals appointed under 5 U.S.C. §3109 are specifically exempted from the provisions related to competitive examination (5 CFR Part 332), position classification (5 U.S.C. Chapter 51), and General Schedule pay setting (5 U.S.C. Chapter 53, Subchapter III), in accordance with 5 CFR §304.103(a).
