Appointments may be made on:
A temporary basis (i.e., up to one (1) year); or
A strictly intermittent basis without time limit or for a period determined by the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv. 
Individuals appointed on a temporary basis may be reappointed within the agency (i.e., HHS), in accordance with 5 CFR §304.103(c) and this Instruction, unless otherwise authorized by statute:
OpDivs/StaffDivs may reappoint temporary experts or consultants to perform demonstrably different duties without regard to the length of that individual’s previous expert or consultant service with HHS (5 CFR §304.103(c)).
OpDivs/StaffDivs may reappoint temporary experts and consultants to perform substantially the same duties subject to the following limitations (5 CFR §304.103(c)(1-2)):
An individual who works on a full-time work schedule may be appointed under 5 U.S.C. §3109 at HHS for a maximum of two (2) years (i.e., on an initial appointment not to exceed one (1) year and a reappointment not to exceed one (1) additional year).
An individual who works on a part-time or intermittent work schedule may be reappointed under one of the following options. The OpDiv/StaffDiv must determine which option it will use in advance of the reappointment and must base its determination on objective criteria (e.g., nature of duties, pay level, whether or not work is regularly scheduled.)  Note:  Option 1 must be applied to reappointments of individuals appointed without compensation.
Option 1 -- Annual service.  An expert or consultant may be reappointed, with no limit on the number of reappointments, as long as the individual is paid for no more than six (6) months (130 days or 1,040 hours) of work (or works for no more than that amount of time without compensation) in a service year.  An expert or consultant who exceeds this limit in his/her first service year may be reappointed for one (1) additional year.  An expert or consultant who exceeds the limit during any subsequent service year may not be reappointed.    
Option 2 -- Cumulative earnings.  Under Option 2, HHS experts or consultants have a lifetime limit of twice the maximum applicable salary rate, in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3109(b), the Appropriation Act(s) listed in this Instruction, and 5 CFR §304.103(c)(2)(ii). OpDivs/StaffDivs may reappoint an individual until his/her total earnings from expert or consultant employment within HHS reach the lifetime maximum, as determined by using the applicable maximum salary rate.  At that point, the employment must be terminated.
304-1-60 Compensation, Leave, and Benefits
Experts and consultants are generally covered by the laws that apply to federal employees, including laws related to compensation, leave, overtime, reduction of basic pay by amount of annuity received, reduction of military pay, etc., subject to the provisions described under 5 U.S.C. Chapter 63; 5 CFR §304.106; and this Instruction.  
The rate of basic pay for individuals hired under 5 U.S.C. §3109 is set by the OpDiv/StaffDiv on an hourly or daily basis, not to exceed the pay limits specified in the appropriation or other statute that authorizes the appointment (5 U.S.C. §3109(b); HHS Appropriations Act(s) listed this Instruction;    5 CFR §304.104 and 105). 
The Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1993 (Public Law 102-394, Title V, §503, 106 Stat. 1825 (Oct. 6, 1992)) covers all HHS OpDivs/StaffDivs, with the exception of Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the Indian Health Service (IHS), and gives permanent authorization to set pay for services authorized by 5 U.S.C. §3109 at rates not to exceed the daily rate equivalent to the maximum rate payable for senior-level positions under 5 U.S.C. §5376.  The maximum rate of pay cannot exceed Level IV of the Executive Schedule which was the maximum rate of basic pay for senior level positions under 5 U.S.C. 5376 when the permanent appropriations cap was enacted in 1993 (OPM Memo, New SL/ST Pay System, dated April 2, 2009, and Pay for Consultants and Scientists Appointed under Title 42, B-323357 (Comp. Gen. July 11, 2012).
The initial rate of basic pay is determined in consideration with the following factors:
The level and difficulty of the work to be performed;
The qualifications of the expert or consultant;
The pay rates of comparable individuals performing similar work in the Federal or non-Federal sectors; and
The availability of qualified candidates (5 CFR §304.104(b)).
An expert or consultant may be employed without compensation, provided the individual agrees in advance in writing to waive any claim for compensation for those services (5 CFR §304.104(c)). 
Because individuals appointed under 5 U.S.C. §3109 are explicitly exempted from the general schedule (5 CFR §304.103(a)(1)), those paid on a daily basis are not entitled to overtime. However, experts and consultants who are nonexempt from the minimum wage and overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) may be entitled to overtime pay under FLSA (5 CFR §304.106(c) and 5 CFR Part 551).
Experts and consultants who have a regular scheduled tour of duty qualify for premium pay if they meet the applicable eligibility requirements under 5 U.S.C. §§5541-5550b. 
Experts and consultants are not entitled to receive locality pay adjustments or automatic  adjustments in their rates of basic pay at the time of general pay increases described under 5 U.S.C. 5303 since they are not General Schedule employees.  Such pay adjustments are at the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s discretion, unless specifically authorized in the employee’s official appointing document.  (5 CFR §304.106(a) and OPM Fact Sheet: Expert and Consultant Pay)
OpDivs/StaffDivs have the authority to adjust the pay of experts and consultants after initial appointment, in accordance with its internal guidance on the amount and timing of expert and consultant pay adjustments and subject the pay limitations in this Instruction.  In addition to the factors listed above, job performance, contributions to OpDiv/StaffDiv mission, and the general pay increases given to other OpDiv/StaffDiv employees are considered in determining pay adjustments in accordance with 5 CFR §304.106(a). 
Experts and consultants may be paid on an intermittent basis for more than one (1) expert or consultant appointment; however, they may not be paid for service for the same days/hours (5 CFR §304.106(d)). OpDivs/StaffDivs should inquire at the time of appointment if the individual is currently serving on another expert or consultant appointment and advise the employee of this pay restriction and their responsibility to inform HHS if their employment status changes to avoid financial indebtedness.
Experts and consultants with a regular tour of duty (i.e., not intermittent) are covered by the leave provisions under 5 U.S.C. Chapter 63 (5 CFR §304.106(g) and OPM Fact Sheet: Expert and Consultant Pay).
Experts and consultants whose service is intermittent or are serving under a temporary appointment for one year or less are not covered under the Federal Employees Retirement System and are generally ineligible for health benefits, life insurance, or retirement with limited regulatory exceptions.  If an employee currently covered by federal retirement, life insurance, or health benefits is appointed as an expert or consultant without a break in service or after a separation from service of three days or less, coverage is continued.  To continue life insurance coverage for an intermittent employee, there must be an expectation that the employee will return to the previous position on a full-time basis (See 5 CFR §§ 831.201; 870.302; 890.102).  HR Centers and employees should consult their servicing HR benefits specialist concerning eligibility or the continuation of federal benefits.
See OPM Fact Sheet: Expert and Consultant Pay for additional guidance on calculating rates of pay; locality payments; overtime and other premium pay; and leave benefits.

Experts and consultants are not covered by the HHS Performance Management Appraisal Program (HHS Instruction 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program).  They are eligible for awards in accordance with HHS Instruction 451-1, Awards.  Questions on performance and awards should be sent to HCP-HHS@hhs.gov.  
304-1-70 Appeal Rights
In some circumstances, individuals appointed as an expert or consultant under 5 U.S.C. §3109 may have appeal rights to the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB).  Excepted service employees who meet the definition of ‘employee’ under 5 U.S.C §7511(a)(1)(B-C) generally have appeal rights to the MSPB for adverse actions. Servicing employee relations staff should be consulted when dealing with unacceptable performance and/or employee misconduct to ensure actions are in compliance with law, regulations, HHS policy, and applicable collective bargaining agreement(s).