HHS Instruction: 304-1: Appointment of Experts and Consultants
Effective Date: 08/17/2023

Material Transmitted:

HHS Instruction 304-1, Appointment of Experts and Consultants, dated 08/17/2023.

Material Superseded:

HHS Instruction 304-1, Appointment of Experts and Consultants, dated 04/21/2023.

Background:

This Instruction has been revised to update eligibility for federal benefits due to a OPM regulatory change extending the Federal Employees Dental and Vision Insurance Program (FEDVIP) to certain employees on temporary or intermitted employment.

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out by HHS Operating and Staff Division HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, collective bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/

W. Robert Leavitt
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Chief Human Capital Officer

Subject: Appointment of Experts and Consultants
304-1-00   Purpose
304-1-10   Coverage and Exclusions
304-1-20   References
304-1-30   Definitions
304-1-40   Responsibilities
304-1-50   Appointment and Reappointment
304-1-60   Compensation, Leave, and Benefits
304-1-70   Appeal Rights
304-1-80   Personnel Actions
304-1-90   Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability

304-1-00 Purpose
This Instruction establishes policy, responsibility and requirements on the appointment and compensation of individuals hired under Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.) Section 3109 and 5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 304.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply. 

304-1-10 Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage.
This Instruction covers all paid and unpaid appointments under 5 U.S.C. §3109 to provide professional or technical expertise that does not exist or is not readily available within HHS, or to perform services that are not of a continuing nature and/or could not be performed by HHS employees. 
The HHS Secretary may obtain in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3109, but without regard to the time limitations under 5 U.S.C. §3109, services for not more than 50 experts or consultants who have scientific or professional qualifications in the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), 42 U.S.C. §299c-5(f) . 
The Assistant Secretary of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) may obtain in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3109, but without regard to the time limitations under 5 U.S.C. §3109, services for not more than 20 experts or consultants who have professional qualifications, 42 U.S.C. §290aa(h) .  
The Director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) may appoint in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3109, but without regard to the time limitations under 5 U.S.C. §3109, up to 220 NIH experts and consultants with scientific or other professional qualifications, 42 U.S.C. §282d . 
The Director of the National Cancer Institute (NIH NCI) may obtain after consultation with the NCI advisory council and in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3109, but without regard to the time limitations under 5 U.S.C. §3109, the services of not more than 151 experts or consultants who have scientific or professional qualifications, 42 U.S.C. §285a–2(b)(5) . 
Exclusions.  In accordance with 5 CFR Part 304, this Instruction does not apply to: 
Procurement of expert or consultant services by contracts.
Expert or consultant appointments via other employment authorities (e.g., 5 CFR §213.3102(l)), 42 U.S.C. §209(f), etc.); or
Positions or work listed under 5 CFR §304.103(b).
As of the date of this policy, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) does not have authorization to use 5 U.S.C. 3109 to hire or pay experts or consultants, and the Indian Health Service (IHS) has temporary authorization through its FY2023 annual appropriations to use 5 U.S.C. §3109 to hire or pay experts or consultants.  In accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3109(b), FDA and/or IHS must establish a provision in its annual appropriations, i.e., for FDA, the Department of Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, or for IHS, the Department of Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, or other statute before using 5 U.S.C. §3109. 
Bargaining Unit Employees.  The provisions of this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71 , and such actions require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees.  When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
304-1-20 References
Permanent authority for HHS (except FDA and IHS) to use 5 U.S.C. §3109:  Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1993, Public Law 102-394, Title V, §503, 106 Stat. 1825 (Oct. 6, 1992).

