Creditable Time.
In accordance with 5 CFR §315.906:
A supervisor or manager who is reassigned, transferred, or promoted to another supervisory or managerial position while serving a supervisory or managerial probation or trial period, receives credit for service in the former supervisor or manager position.  Service credit is not transferable between manager and supervisor positions.
Service on detail, temporary promotion, or reassignment to another supervisory or managerial position while serving a probation or trial period is creditable toward completion of the probation or trial period.  Service in a nonsupervisory or non- managerial position is not creditable.
Prior service in a supervisory or managerial position via temporary appointment, promotion, or reassignment is creditable toward completion of a probation or trial period.  Prior service under a detail to a supervisory or managerial position is creditable only when the detail is made permanent without a break in service, following appropriate merit staffing procedures. Documented authorization must be approved by the OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Director or designee, in consultation with the probationer's supervisor.
Service during a supervisory or managerial probation/trial period from which an employee was separated or demoted for performance or conduct reasons is not creditable toward completion of a probation/trial period required under a subsequent appointment.  In situations where the individual did not complete probation through no fault of their own, service may be creditable on a case-by-case basis.  Documented authorization must be approved by the HR Director or designee, in consultation with the probationer's supervisor.
Service credit towards completion of a supervisory or managerial probation/trial period is transferable between competitive to excepted service supervisory or managerial positions, subject to the documented authorization of the HR Director or designee, in consultation with the probationer's supervisor, but not between excepted to competitive service supervisory or managerial positions.
If the supervisor or manager is new to the federal service and has not previously served an initial probationary period for non-temporary positions in the competitive service, the individual concurrently serves both the supervisory or managerial probationary and the initial probationary period. In accordance with 5 CFR §315.909(a), the initial probationary period takes precedence and completion of the initial probationary period fulfills the supervisory or managerial probation.
Absences in a non-pay status in excess of 22 workdays, except for periods of military duty or compensable injury, extend the probation or trial period by the amount equal to the time off on non-pay status.
Completion of Supervisory or Managerial Probation/Trial Period. The one (1) year supervisory or managerial probation/trial period ends when the employee completes his/her scheduled tour of duty on the day before the first (1st) anniversary date of the employee's appointment.
Failure to Satisfactorily Complete a Supervisory or Managerial Probation/Trial Period.
The consequence for failing to successfully complete the supervisory or managerial probation/trial period is the employee's removal from the supervisory or managerial position, but not necessarily termination.
If the probationer previously held a federal position and completed the initial-appointment probation/trial period, the employee is reassigned to the OpDiv/StaffDiv position (within the same service, competitive or excepted) at no lower grade and pay than the position previously held just prior to accepting the supervisory or managerial position, in accordance with 5 CFR §315.907(a) and this policy.  The employee must be notified in writing that he/she is being reassigned (5 CFR §315.907(c)).
A nonsupervisory or non-managerial employee who is demoted into a supervisory or managerial position subject to probation/trial period requirements identified under Section 315-1-60 A. above and then fails to complete the probation or trial period for performance reasons, is reassigned to a position at the same grade and pay as the supervisory or managerial position, in accordance with 5 CFR §315.907(b) and this policy.  The individual must be notified in writing that he/she is being reassigned (5 CFR §315.907(c)).
Supervisors or managers concurrently serving both the supervisory or managerial probationary period and the initial probationary period for competitive service positions, or supervisors or managers serving in a trial period who previously served in a non-temporary competitive service position, may have due process rights if they meet the definition of 'employee' under 5 U.S.C. §7511.
The OpDiv/StaffDiv's Employee Relations staff must be consulted prior to initiating any performance based or adverse action to ensure the requirements specified under 5 CFR Parts 432 and 752 are followed and the proposed action is legally supportable.  See also Section 315-1-70, Performance Based and Adverse Actions.
Federal Wage System (FWS) Supervisors.  OpDivs/StaffDivs shall consult their negotiated labor/management agreement(s) for rules covering probationary periods for FWS supervisors and establish internal procedures as necessary.
315-1-80  Performance Based and Adverse Actions
OpDiv/StaffDiv Employee Relations (ER) staff should be consulted as soon as performance or other issues surface.  ER staff must be consulted prior to taking a performance based or adverse action during a probation or trial period to ensure compliance with applicable federal laws and regulations and HHS policy.
Once an individual in either a competitive or excepted service position meets the definition of 'employee' under 5 U.S.C. §7511, they are generally entitled to advance written notice, an opportunity to respond to a proposed adverse action, and appeal rights to the MSPB.
Probationary employees may appeal a termination on the basis of discrimination or improper procedure, as described under 5 CFR §§315.805, 806, and 908.
315-1-90  Documentation and Accountability
Records, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the National Archives & Records Administration (NARA) record disposition schedule.
Records involved in litigation that are subject to a litigation hold must be preserved until an official litigation hold lift is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed.
ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.