
Employee. An individual serving in a competitive or excepted service position, and who, by definition of 'employee' under 5 U.S.C. ยง7511, has the full rights and protections of a federal employee. This generally happens after completion of a probation or trial period, although there are exceptions in 5 U.S.C. ยง7511. Once an individual meets the definition of an employee, they have due process rights and are entitled to advance written notice, an opportunity to respond to a proposed adverse action, and appeal rights to the MSPB.
Probationary period. An introductory period of employment for individuals in competitive service positions serving on a career or career-conditional appointment under 5 CFR Part 315, which allows management to evaluate a new employee's performance and conduct to determine whether his/her continued employment is in the best interest of the Department.
Trial Period. An introductory period of employment for individuals in excepted service positions and individuals on a term appointment in the competitive service, which allows management to evaluate a new employee's performance and conduct to determine whether his/her continued employment is in the best interest of the Department.
Manager. A manager supervises other supervisors and is not a member of the SES. Managers direct the work of an organizational unit; are held accountable for the success of specific line or staff functions; monitor and evaluate the progress of the organization toward meeting goals, and make adjustments in objectives, work plans, schedules, and commitment of resources (OPM's General Schedule Supervisory Guide).
Supervisor. A supervisor accomplishes work through the direction of other people and performs at least the minimum supervisory duties required, described in OPM's General Schedule Supervisory Guide. They plan work; communicate organizational goals and policies; guide performance; listen to concerns and ideas; ensure employees have the resources needed to do their jobs; and often make difficult decisions about employee recruitment, retention, development, recognition, and appraisal. Supervisors are also often expected to perform work of the office that requires technical skills.
315-1-50  Responsibilities
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide human resources guidance and policy regarding probationary and trial periods consistent with HHS and OPM policy, procedures and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Periodically conducts accountability reviews of HHS Operating Divisions/Staff Divisions (OpDivs/StaffDivs, or Divisions) use of probationary and trial periods to ensure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDivs/StaffDivs
Comply with this policy, federal laws, regulations, and collective bargaining agreements covering probationary and trial periods.
Advise new hires and managers/supervisors of their probationary status; the length of the probation/trial period; the requirements for successfully completing the probation/trial period; and consequences for failing.  Information on probation/trial periods should also be included in vacancy announcements, especially when recruiting outside the federal government.
Establish performance standards for each employee, in accordance with HHS performance policy, that address performance expectations and organizational goals.
Issue performance plans on a timely basis, in accordance with HHS policy.
Evaluate and provide regular feedback to probationers regarding performance and conduct throughout their probation/trial period.
Support probationers through training, development, coaching, and mentoring opportunities to ensure successful performance, and to build their skills and/or improve in areas where they are not succeeding as appropriate.
Managers and supervisors promptly consult with their Division's servicing Employee Relations staff for assistance in dealing with unacceptable performance and/or employee misconduct to ensure actions are in compliance with law, regulations, and HHS policy.
Hold supervisors accountable for effectively using probationary and trial periods, including ensuring supervisors are monitoring probationers' performance and communicating regularly with probationers.
Properly annotate personnel actions when an employee is required to serve a probation or trial period and maintain records.
315-1-60   Probationary and Trial Periods