Applicability.
Individuals who are initially appointed to a non-temporary position in the competitive service must satisfactorily complete a one (1) year probationary period.  Persons who are transferred from another federal agency without a break in service of a single workday; or promoted, demoted, or reassigned before completion of a probationary period must complete their probationary period in the new position (5 CFR §315.801(b) and 802(a)).
As January 6, 2021 (initial date of policy issuance), individuals who are initially appointed to a non- temporary position in the excepted service must satisfactorily complete a two (2) year trial period, unless the law, Executive Order, or regulation authorizing the excepted service appointment specifies a shorter trial period.  Persons who are promoted, demoted, or reassigned before completion of a trial period must complete their trial period in the new excepted position.
An employee who has completed a trial period in the excepted service must complete an initial probationary period during the first (1st) year the employee is given a career or career-conditional appointment under the conditions specified under 5 CFR §315.801 unless the employee previously held a non-temporary competitive service position and completed an initial probationary period.
Individuals who are initially appointed to the competitive service either by a special appointing authority or by conversion from another hiring authority listed under 5 CFR Part 315, Subparts F or G, serve a one (1) year probationary period upon conversion unless specifically exempt from serving probation by the hiring authority itself (5 CFR §315.801(e)).  For example, Schedule A Persons With Disabilities employees (who have not previously held a non-temporary competitive service position and completed an initial probationary period) must serve a probationary period upon conversion because the Schedule A authority is listed under 5 CFR Part 315, Subpart G (5 CFR 315.709), and the Schedule A Disability authority (5 CFR 213.3102(u)) doesn’t specifically exempt probationary periods upon conversion
An employee who has completed a probationary period in the competitive service may be required to serve a trial period in the excepted service, subject to approval of the OpDiv/StaffDiv HRO, in consultation with the hiring manager and the provisions of the excepted appointing authority.  This requirement, if adopted, should be applied uniformly across similar positions within the Division (i.e., for all positions hired under the same excepted service appointing authority).
The first year of a term appointment is a trial period regardless of the method of appointment, in accordance with 5 CFR Part 316 (term appointments are in the competitive service yet serve a trial period).
Creditable Time.
Prior federal civilian service, including prior service in a temporary or excepted service position, is credited toward completion of an initial probationary period when the prior service is within HHS; in a same or similar position (determined by the employee's actual duties and responsibilities); and includes or is followed by no more than a single break in service that does not exceed 30 calendar days (5 CFR § 315.802(b); Hurst v. Dept. of the Army, 2010 MSPB 1 (January 6, 2010); Liu v. Dept. of Agriculture, 2007 MSPB 159 (June 19, 2007); and Sosa v. Dept. of Defense, 2006 MSPB 149 (June 5, 2006)).
Prior federal civilian service is credited toward completion of a trial period when the prior service is within HHS; in a same or similar HHS position (determined by the employee's actual duties and responsibilities); and includes or is followed by no more than a single break in service that does not exceed 30 calendar days, unless the law, Executive Order, or regulation authorizing the excepted service appointment specifies differently.
For individuals in term appointments, prior federal civilian service is credited toward completion of a trial period in the same manner as B.1. above (5 CFR §316.304(a)).
Absences in a non-pay status in excess of 22 workdays, except for periods of military service or compensable injury, extend the probation or trial period by the amount equal to the time off in non-pay status.
The probation or trial period for part-time employees is computed in the basis of calendar time, in the same manner as for full-time employees (5 CFR §315.802(d)); and
For intermittent employees, i.e., those who do not have regularly schedule tours of duty, each day or part of a day in a pay status counts as 1 day or credit toward the 260 days in a pay status required for completion of probation.  (However, the probationary period cannot be less than one (1) year, in accordance with 5 CFR §315.802(d). For intermittent employees in the excepted service, the trial period cannot be less than two (2) years.)
Completion of a Probation or Trial Period.
A probationary period ends when the employee completes his/her scheduled tour of duty on the day before the anniversary date of the employee's appointment, in accordance with 5 CFR §315.804(b).
A trial period ends when the employee completes his/her scheduled tour of duty on the day before the second (2nd) anniversary date of the employee's appointment.
Failure to Satisfactorily Complete an Initial Appointment Probation or Trial Period.
When a probationer does not successfully complete an initial appointment probation or trial period because the individual’s work performance or conduct fails to demonstrate fitness or qualifications for continued employment, the individual is terminated.
A probationer who does not successfully complete a trial period may have due process rights as an employee, as explained in this policy, if they have previously served in a competitive service position and completed an initial probationary period.
The OpDiv/StaffDiv's Employee Relations staff must be consulted prior to the end of the employee's probation or trial period to ensure the performance-based or adverse action requirements specified under 5 CFR Parts 432 and 752 are followed and the proposed action is legally supportable. See also Section 315-1-70, Performance Based and Adverse Actions.
Federal Wage System (FWS) Employees. OpDivs/StaffDivs consult their negotiated labor/management agreement(s) for rules covering probationary periods for FWS employees and establish internal procedures as necessary.
315-1-70  Supervisor and Manager Probationary or Trial Periods
Applicability.
An individual appointed for the first time to an HHS supervisory or (non-SES) managerial position without time limitation, must serve a one (1) year probationary period, in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §3321; and 5 CFR §315.904 and 905.
Individuals are required to complete a single probationary period when appointed for the first time to an HHS supervisory position, and a single probationary period when appointed for the first time to an HHS managerial position (5 CFR §315.904).
An employee who has previously completed a probationary period in a supervisor position or a probationary period in a managerial position does not need to serve another supervisory or managerial probationary period; however, service credit is not transferable between manager and supervisor positions. (5 CFR §315.904(b))
The requirements of this section, 315-1-60, also apply to HHS supervisor or (non-SES) manager positions in the excepted service, unless the provisions of the excepted authority authorizing the appointment (law, Executive Order, or regulation) specify differently.  These individuals serve supervisor or manager trial periods.
Employees who were serving or served in supervisory or managerial positions as of July 31, 1979, are exempt from the requirements in this section, 315-1-60, except in cases when a supervisor is assigned to a managerial position, the employee must complete a probation/trial period for managers (5 CFR §315.904(c)).
