315-1: Probationary and Trial Periods
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods, dated 08/18/2023.

Material Superseded:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods, dated 08/19/2021.

Background:
This Instruction clarifies when a probationary period is required after completion of a trial period, in accordance with law, regulation, Merit Systems Protection Board precedent, Departmental policy and Office of Personnel Management (OPM) guidance.

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out by Operating and Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv) HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy

/s/

W. Robert Leavitt
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Chief Human Capital Officer, Acting

315-1-00  Sections
351-1-10  Purpose
351-1-20  Coverage and Exclusions
351-1-30  References
351-1-40  Definitions
351-1-50  Responsibilities
351-1-60  Probationary and Trial Periods
351-1-70  Supervisor and Manager Probationary or Trial Periods
351-1-80  Performance Based and Adverse Actions
351-1-90 Documentation and Accountability

351-1-10 Purpose
This Instruction provides policy and procedures concerning probationary and trial periods within the Department of Health and Human Services (Department or HHS).

Probationary and trial periods provide an opportunity for supervisors to evaluate employee performance before finalizing appointments.  Supervisors set expectations for performance, provide feedback, and make the final decision whether a probationer satisfactorily completes their probation or trial period to continue employment.  Servicing Human Resources Offices (HROs) support supervisors by providing them the information and guidance they need to effectively perform these duties.  When used properly, probationary and trial periods are one of the most valid predictors of future success and can help ensure that the HHS has qualified, competent employees.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

315-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage.
This policy applies to HHS competitive and excepted service employees serving on initial appointments; federal wage system (FWS) employees; and employees serving supervisory and managerial probation or trial periods.
This policy applies to individuals hired under non-title 5 excepted service authorities, unless the provisions in the non-title 5 excepted authority specifically excludes individuals from appeal rights or exempts those individuals from 5 U.S.C. §7511’s definition of employee(Todd v. Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) 1995, and Lal v. MSPB 2016).
Exclusions.
This policy does not apply to individuals serving on temporary limited positions of one (1) year or less in the competitive and excepted services, or members of the Senior Executive Service (SES), Senior Level (SL) or Scientific or Professional (ST).
The provisions of this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71 , and such actions require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees.  When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
315-1-30  References
5 United States Code (U.S.C.) Section 3321, Competitive Service; probationary period 
5 U.S.C. §7511, Adverse Actions; employee defined 
5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 315, Subpart H, Probation on Initial Appointment to a Competitive Position
5 CFR Part 315, Subpart I, Probation on Initial Appointment to a Supervisory or Managerial Position
5 CFR Part 316, Temporary and Term Employment (trial period for term employees)
5 CFR Part 432, Performance Based Reduction in Grade and Removal Actions
5 CFR Part 752, Adverse Actions
HHS Instruction, 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program (non SES)
HHS Instruction, 752, Discipline and Adverse Actions
315-1-40  Definitions
