
330-2-70: Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP)
Purpose. The Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP) covers displaced federal employees per 5 CFR Part 330, Subpart G, and this Instruction. The program provides federal employees a way to transition into a vacant competitive service position in another federal agency if they have been separated, through no fault of their own, as a result of downsizing, reorganization, restructuring, or other similar events.
Vacancy. When OpDivs/StaffDivs accept applicants from outside HHS’ competitive service workforce to fill a permanent or time-limited competitive service position at GS-15 (or equivalent) or below lasting 121 days or more (including extensions), HR Centers must give selection priority to ICTAP candidates who apply to the vacancy, unless the action is one of the exceptions listed in Appendix B of this Instruction.
ICTAP Candidate. A federal employee is given selection priority when they:
Meet the definition of ‘displaced’ employee, as defined in Section 330-2-30;
Have a current performance rating of record of at least fully successful or equivalent;
Apply for a vacancy at or below the employee’s current grade level and without greater promotion potential than the position from which the employee occupied or may be separated;
Occupy a position in the same commuting area of the vacancy (see E.1.f. in this Section for exceptions);
Submit an application for a specific vacancy within the JOA open period, and provide proof of eligibility (i.e., one of the documents listed under the definition of displaced in this Instruction or 5 CFR §330.710); and
Meet the definition of ‘Well Qualified’ for the specific vacancy.
Future selection priority for positions previously obtained via ICTAP is not given if the federal employee was terminated or removed from that position for performance or conduct-based actions under 5 CFR Parts 432 and 752.
Period of Eligibility. The eligibility period begins on the date the federal employee meets the definition of displaced employee, and it ends on one of the following dates (5 CFR §330.708):
One (1) year from the date of:
Separation by RIF;
Removal for declining a geographic relocation outside the local commuting area;
Federal agency certification that it cannot place the employee (5 CFR Part 353); or
OPM notification that the employee’s disability annuity has, or will be, terminated.
Two (2) years from the date of RIF separation for persons eligible for positions restricted to preference eligibles (5 CFR Part 330, Subpart D).
On the date the ICTAP candidate:
Receives a notice rescinding, canceling, or modifying the notice which gave the employee ICTAP eligibility (so the employee no longer meets the displaced definition);
Separates for any reason before the RIF or removal effective date;
Is appointed to a career, career-conditional, or excepted service appointment without time limitation in any executive agency at any grade or pay level;
Declines an offer of a permanent appointment at any grade or pay level; or
Fails to reply within seven (7) business days to an offer or official availability inquiry for a permanent appointment at any grade or pay level.
OPM may extend the above eligibility periods due to administrative or procedural errors.
ICTAP eligibility for former Military Reserve or National Guard Technicians ends when the technician no longer receives the special disability retirement annuity (See Section 330-2-30, Displaced Employee (under ICTAP)).
Applying ICTAP Selection Priority. In accordance with 5 CFR §§330.703, 330.705 and 330.706:
Unless the personnel action is one of the exceptions listed in Appendix B of this Instruction, HR Centers must select an available ICTAP candidate over any other external candidate (outside of HHS’ permanent competitive service workforce) for a vacant position, if the position:
Is a permanent or time-limited competitive service position at GS-15 or below (or equivalent) to be filled for a total of 121 days or more, including all extensions;
Is at the grade or pay level with a representative rate no higher than the representative rate of the grade or pay level of the ICTAP eligible’s current or last permanent position of record;
Has no greater promotion potential than the ICTAP eligible’s current or last permanent position of record;
Is in the same local commuting area as the ICTAP eligible’s current or last permanent position of record (see f. immediately below for exceptions), and
Is filled during the ICTAP eligible’s eligibility period.
When a position is advertised with a duty location as ‘Anywhere in the U.S.’ (or equivalent) or ‘Location is Negotiable After Selection, U.S.’ (for example, when a vacant position is designated as full-time remote or eligible for full-time remote work), selection priority must be given to all ICTAP candidates, regardless of their official duty location. See also Section 330-2-80(D)(3), Advertising Positions.
HR Centers may not procure contract support or other temporary help defined under 5 CFR Part 300, Subpart E until a determination is made that no ICTAP candidate is available.