
Vacancy. When OpDivs/StaffDivs fill a permanent or time-limited competitive service position at GS- 15 (or equivalent) or below lasting 121 days or more (including extensions), HR Centers must give selection priority to CTAP candidates, unless the action is one of the exceptions listed in Appendix A of this Instruction.
CTAP Candidate. An HHS employee is given selection priority when they:
Meet the definition of ‘surplus’ or ‘displaced’ employee, as defined in Section 330-2-30;
Have a current performance rating of record of at least fully successful or equivalent;
Apply for a vacancy at or below the employee’s current grade level and without greater promotion potential than the position from which the employee occupies or may be separated;
Occupy a position in the same commuting area of the vacancy (see E.1.f. in this Section for exceptions);
Applying for a specific vacancy within the job opportunity announcement (JOA) open period, and provide proof of eligibility (i.e., one of the documents listed under the definition of displaced or surplus in this Instruction or 5 CFR §330.612); and
Meet the definition of ‘Well Qualified’ for the specific vacancy.
Period of Eligibility. The eligibility period begins on the date the HHS employee receives the RIF notice or notice of proposed removal and meets the definition of a surplus or displaced employee. It ends on the date one of the following occurs (5 CFR §§330.607(i) and 330.610):
Employee separates from HHS either voluntarily or involuntarily;
Employee receives a notice rescinding, canceling, or modifying the notice which gave the employee CTAP eligibility (so the employee no longer meets either the surplus or displaced definition);
Employee declines an offer of an HHS permanent appointment at any grade or pay level;
Employee is appointed to another HHS position at any grade or pay level, either permanent or time-limited before the employee is separated;
Employee is appointed to a career, career-conditional, or excepted service appointment without time limitation in another executive agency at any grade or pay level; or
Employee fails to reply to the OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Center within seven (7) business days to an offer of a permanent appointment at any grade or pay level.
Applying CTAP Selection Priority. In accordance with 5 CFR §§330.604, 330.605, 330.607, and 330.608:
Unless the personnel action is one of the exceptions listed in Appendix A of this Instruction, HR Centers must select an available CTAP candidate over any other applicant for a vacant position, if the position:
Is a permanent or time-limited competitive service position at GS-15 or below (or equivalent) to be filled for a total of 121 days or more, including all extensions;
Is at the grade or pay level with a representative rate no higher than the representative rate of the grade or pay level of the CTAP candidate’s permanent position of record;
Has no greater promotion potential than the CTAP candidate’s permanent position of record;
Is in the same local commuting area as the CTAP candidate’s permanent position of record (see f. immediately below for exceptions), and
Is filled during the CTAP eligible’s eligibility period.
When a position is advertised with a duty location as ‘Anywhere in the U.S.’ (or equivalent) or ‘Location is Negotiable After Selection, U.S.’ (for example, when a vacant position is designated as full-time remote or eligible for full-time remote work), selection priority must be given to all CTAP candidates, regardless of their official duty location. See also Section 330-2-80(D)(3), Advertising Positions.
OpDivs/StaffDivs may not procure contract support or other temporary help defined under 5 CFR Part 300, Subpart E until a determination is made that no CTAP candidate is available.
OpDivs/StaffDivs may not take the promotion and internal placement actions listed under 5 CFR §335.102 to place a permanent competitive service employee into a vacancy until a determination is made that no CTAP candidate is available.
HR Centers may appoint any CTAP candidate when two (2) or more qualified CTAP candidates apply for a vacancy. For example, the HR Center may provide an internal OpDiv/StaffDiv candidate with higher priority than another OpDiv/StaffDiv candidate.
HR Centers may provide CTAP selection priority to eligible employees from another commuting area after fulfilling its requirement to provide CTAP selection priority to candidates in the local commuting area.
Applicant Notification and Second-Level Review: All CTAP candidates who apply for a specific vacancy must be sent a written notice of the final status of their application, including whether the candidate was determined to be ‘Well Qualified;’ if another CTAP candidate was hired; if the vacancy was filled under one of the exceptions listed in Appendix A; or if the recruitment was canceled. Additionally, if the candidate was determined not well-qualified, the HR Center must conduct a second-level review by another HR Specialist, document the job-related reasons for the determination, and notify such CTAP candidates of the results of the independent second-level review.
CTAP obligations must be cleared at the initial announcement. See Section 330-2-80, Advertising Vacant Positions.
After the OpDiv/StaffDiv announces the vacancy in USAStaffing and meets its obligation to any CTAP candidate(s) who applied to the announcement, the HR Center may fill the vacant position with a permanent HHS competitive service candidate, following appropriate merit staffing procedures.
Order of selection when filling vacancies open to HHS candidates:
CTAP
All other internal HHS candidates
Before filling a vacant competitive service position with an external candidate (outside of HHS’ permanent competitive service workforce), the OpDiv/StaffDiv must also apply the requirements of ICTAP and RPL (See Sections 330-2-70 and 90 of this Instruction).