
HHS does not elect to establish a Reemployment List (RL) in accordance with 5 CFR 302.303(c) and HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service.
PRL Eligible. In accordance with 5 CFR §§302.303 and 302.304(a):
Former HHS excepted service employees, both preference eligible and non-preference eligible, who have been furloughed or separated under RIF without delinquency or misconduct from an excepted service appointment without time limit; and
Received a performance rating of record of at least fully successful or equivalent as their most recent performance rating; and
Have not declined an offer of employment under RIF (5 CFR 351, Subpart G) with the same type of work schedule and with a representative rate at least as high as the position from which the employee was separated.
Former HHS excepted service employees who are preference eligible, and who, as the result of an appeal under 5 CFR Part 752, are found by the MSPB to have been unjustifiably dismissed from HHS but are not entitled to immediate restoration by the MSPB decision; or
Former HHS excepted service employees fully recovered from a compensable injury (described under 5 CFR Part 353) more than 1 year after the date compensation began.
Former employees in positions exempt from the 5 CFR Part 302 appointment procedures and listed under 5 CFR §302.101(c), such as attorneys, are included in B.1-3. above.
Registration.
Timeframe. Employees who are eligible for the PRL must register within the following timeframes:
On or before the separation date; or
Within 30 days after the date of injury, compensation benefits stop; or the date the Department of Labor denies an appeal for continuation of injury compensation benefits in accordance with 5 CFR §353.301(b).
Positions.
Employees must submit information to their servicing HR Center within the registration timeframe specifying the positions and conditions they will accept, including occupation(s), series, grades, work schedule (full-time, part-time, seasonal, or intermittent), and minimum hours of work per week.
Employees may register for positions within the local commuting area at the same pay level with a representative rate no higher than the position from which the registrant was separated, with the following exceptions (5 CFR §302.303(b)(2-3)):
Former employees who were furloughed or separated due to a compensable injury and who are not entitled to immediate restoration may also register for location(s) where vacancies are available if a vacancy is unlikely to occur where the former employee last served during his/her period of reemployment priority;
Former employees whom MSPB finds to have been unjustly dismissed are considered/registered outside the commuting area from which they were separated if the MSBP decision specifies a broader or different geographic location.
PRL eligibles may specify conditions they will accept, including:
Additional occupation(s) and series;
Grades lower than the position from which the registrant was/will be separated;
Work schedules (full-time, part-time, seasonal, or intermittent);
Minimum hours of work per week, as applicable, and
Specific OpDivs/StaffDivs within the same local commuting area registered.
If a PRL eligible agrees to transfer with their function under RIF but will be separated by RIF from the new position, registration is limited to the PRL for the new local commuting area.
Registration Form. HR Centers may develop a form for employees to use, request that they include the position information on their resumes, or require the information be submitted in another format. These instructions must be provided to employees during the orientation session described in Section 330-2-50 of this Instruction or when the HR Center issues a separation notice or Certification of Expected Separation under RIF; the employee accepts a lower grade or pay level; or is separated from the agency because of a compensable work-related injury.
Application Guidance. HR Centers must be available to provide PRL eligibles guidance on how to register and help identify the positions for which they are eligible and qualified.
PRL Eligibility Period. In accordance with 5 CFR §302.303, eligibility expires:
Two (2) years from either the date of separation or the date the former employee is registered on the PRL due to recovery from a compensable work-related injury; or
On the date the PRL registrant is removed from the PRL for one of the following reasons:
Is placed in a position without a time limit;
Withdraws from consideration, or declines an offer of excepted appointment without time limit; or
Fails to reply to an inquiry concerning a specific position having a representative rate at least as high, and with the same type of work schedule, as the position from which the person was separated.
Required Evidence for PRL Removal: Evidence must be maintained by the HR Center for any reason for removal. When an individual is removed from the PRL because of a failure to reply to a specific permanent job offer or an inquiry of availability for a specific permanent vacancy, evidence is required showing the offer, inquiry, or scheduled interview was made in writing and clearly stated that failure to reply would result in removal from the PRL.
Declination of a time-limited appointment does not affect PRL eligibility.
Applying PRL Selection Priority.
Unless the personnel action is one of the exceptions listed in Appendix D of this Instruction, HR Centers must select qualified PRL registrants for excepted service vacancies if the position:
Is permanent or time-limited to be filled by an excepted service appointment; and
There are PRL eligibles registered for the position at the grade or pay level. (If the  position is available at multiple grade levels, PRL applies at the grade or pay level in which the position is filled.)
HR Centers must consider all qualified registrants on HHS’ PRL for the commuting area and excepted service authority of the position to be filled before referring the names of other qualified excepted service candidates (5 CFR §§302.303(d) and 302.304(a)).
When candidates are being considered for a vacant position from anywhere in the U.S. (or equivalent) or the duty location is negotiable after selection, HR Centers must give selection priority to all qualified PRL eligibles registered for the position at the grade or pay level, regardless of their official duty location, before referring the names of other qualified excepted service candidates.
HR Centers follow the assessment and selection procedures described in HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service (Section 302-1-80) to evaluate PRL eligibles separately from other candidates.
HR Centers may appoint a candidate who is not PRL eligible, or a PRL eligible who has a lower standing on the PRL list when the PRL eligible(s) qualifications will create an undue interruption to the position. The HR Center must notify each PRL eligible of the reasons for non-selection and must also notify any preference eligible(s) on the PRL list of their right to appeal to the MSPB (5 CFR §302.304(a)). This documentation must be maintained in the recruitment case file.
Once an HR Center fulfills these PRL requirements, other excepted service candidates may be considered for the position following the assessment and selection procedures described in HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in Excepted Service.
HR Centers must retain sufficient documentation to demonstrate PRL clearance for each excepted service vacancy.
Individuals entitled to priority consideration who are preference eligibles, or suffered a compensable injury, have appeal rights to the MSPB if they believe their reemployment rights were violated (5 CFR §§302.304(a) and 302.501).
