330-2-30: Definitions
Agency. Executive agency, as defined in 5 U.S.C. 101 and 5 CFR Part 330.101 (i.e., HHS).
Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP). Provides eligible surplus and displaced HHS employees selection priority for HHS competitive service vacancies for which there are active recruitment actions.
Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP). Provides eligible displaced HHS employees selection priority for competitive service vacancies at other Federal agencies and provides eligible displaced employees of other Federal agencies selection priority for HHS competitive service vacancies for which there are active recruitment actions.
Displaced Employee (under CTAP), see also Surplus Employee.
A current career or career-conditional (Tenure Group I or II) competitive service HHS employee, at GS-15 or below (or equivalent), who has received either a reduction in force (RIF) separation notice and has not declined an offer under RIF for a position with the same type of work schedule and the representative rate at least as high as the position from which the employee will be separated, or a notice of proposed removal for declining a directed geographic relocation outside the local commuting area (e.g., directed reassignment or change in duty location); or
A current excepted service HHS employee serving on an appointment without time limit, at grade GS-15 or below (or equivalent), who is on an excepted appointment providing noncompetitive conversion eligibility to a competitive service appointment, and who received a RIF separation notice or a notice of proposed removal for declining a directed geographic relocation outside the local commuting area (e.g., directed reassignment or change in duty location) (5 CFR §330.602).
Displaced Employee (under ICTAP).
A current or former career or career-conditional (Tenure Group I or II) competitive service employee at GS-15 or below (or equivalent) who has received either a RIF separation notice and did not decline an offer under RIF procedures for a position with the same type of work schedule and the representative rate at least as high as the position from which the employee will be separated, or a notice of proposed removal for declining a directed geographic relocation outside the local commuting area (e.g., directed reassignment or change in duty location), or has been separated by RIF procedures or removed for declining a geographic relocation outside the local commuting area;
A current or former excepted service employee serving on an appointment without time limit, at grade GS-15 or below (or equivalent), who is on an excepted appointment providing noncompetitive conversion eligibility to a competitive service appointment, and has received a RIF separation notice or a notice of proposed removal for declining a directed geographic relocation outside the local commuting area (e.g., directed reassignment or change in duty location), or has been separated by RIF procedures or removed for declining a geographic relocation outside the local commuting area;
A former career or career-conditional competitive service employee who was separated because of a compensable work-related injury or illness, whose compensation was terminated, and who has received certification from their former employing agency that it is unable to place the employee as required by 5 CFR Part 353;
A former career or career-conditional competitive service employee who retired with a disability annuity under 5 U.S.C. §§8337 or 8451 and has received notification from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) that the disability annuity has been or will be terminated; or
A former Military Reserve Technician or National Guard Technician receiving a special disability retirement annuity under 5 U.S.C. §§8337(h) or 8456 and who has certification of such annuity from the military department or National Guard Bureau (5 CFR §330.702).
Local Commuting Area. The geographic area usually constitutes one area for employment purposes, any population center (or two or more neighboring ones) and surrounding localities in which employees live and can be reasonably expected to travel back and forth daily to their place of employment (5 CFR §351.203).
Priority Placement Coordinator (PPC). Human resources professional(s) or division(s) within the Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR), who oversee all aspects of the Department-wide HHS Priority Placement Programs, including the RPL and PRL lists. Each OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Center will have its own PPC designated by the Human Resources Director, responsible for administering the day-to-day aspects of the programs for their serviced Operating Division/Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv).
Priority Reemployment List (PRL). HHS’ PRL for excepted service employees provides reemployment consideration and placement assistance to former HHS excepted service employees who have been furloughed or separated by RIF or compensable injury; or who appealed an adverse action to the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) and were found to have been unjustifiably dismissed from the agency but is not entitled to immediate restoration under the MSPB’s decision (5 CFR §302.303).
Reemployment Priority List (RPL). HHS’ RPL for competitive service employees provides reemployment consideration and placement assistance to current and former HHS competitive service employees who have or will be separated by RIF or have fully recovered from a compensable injury after one (1) year (5 CFR §330.201).
Representative Rate. Generally, the fourth step of the grade under the General Schedule including locality rate. For a complete definition, see 5 CFR §351.203.



Surplus Employee (under CTAP).
A current career or career-conditional (Tenure Group I or II) HHS employee serving under an appointment in the competitive service, at grade GS-15 or below (or equivalent), who has received a Certificate of Expected Separation under RIF or other official certification issued by the Department/OpDiv/StaffDiv indicating that the HHS position is surplus (e.g., a notice of position abolishment, or that the employee is eligible for discontinued service retirement); or
A current HHS excepted service employee serving on an appointment without time limit, at grade GS-15 or below (or equivalent), who is on an excepted appointment providing noncompetitive conversion eligibility to a competitive service appointment and has received a Certificate of Expected Separation under RIF or other official certification issued by the Department/OpDiv/StaffDiv indicating that the position is surplus (e.g., a notice of position abolishment, or that the employee is eligible for discontinued service retirement) (5 CFR §330.602).
Well Qualified. A CTAP or ICTAP candidate who:
Meets the qualification standards and eligibility requirements for the position, including minimum educational and experience requirements; any medical qualifications, and suitability;
Meets any selective placement factors for the position established by the HR Center;
(For Vacancies Filled via Merit Promotion) Is rated above minimally qualified as defined through job analysis for the position being filled;
(For Vacancies Filled via Delegated Examining) Meets the definition of ‘Well Qualified’ as defined by the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s category rating procedures (HHS Instruction 1104-1, Delegated Examining Operations);
Is able to perform the essential duties of the position, with or without reasonable accommodation;
Meets any special qualifying condition(s) for the position (such as the ability to speak a specific language or other selective factors); and
Is able to perform the duties of the position upon entry satisfactorily.
