330-2: Priority Placement Programs (CTAP, ICTAP, RPL and PRL)
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs (CTAP, ICTAP, RPL, and PRL), dated 10/27/2022.

Material Superseded:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs (CTAP, ICTAP, RPL, and PRL), dated 06/01/2022.

Background:
This policy is revised to amend the CTAP and ICTAP exceptions (Appendixes A & B) by adding the competitive service college graduate and post-secondary hiring authorities to both lists consistent with 5 CFR Part 330, Subparts F and G.

This issuance is effective immediately and must be carried out by OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, collective bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/
Kimberly Steide

for/W. Robert Leavitt
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Chief Human Capital Officer

Subject: Priority Placement Programs
330-2-00 Purpose
330-2-10 References
330-2-20 Coverage
330-2-30 Definitions
330-2-40 Roles and Responsibilities
330-2-50 Career Transition Services
330-2-60 Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP)
330-2-70 Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP)
330-2-80 Advertising Vacant Positions To Clear CTAP or ICTAP
330-2-90 Reemployment Priority List (RPL)
330-2-100 Priority Reemployment List (PRL)
330-2-110 RPL and PRL List Management
330-2-120 Documentation and Accountability

Appendix A: Exceptions to CTAP
Appendix B: Exceptions to ICTAP
Appendix C: Exceptions to RPL
Appendix D: Exceptions to PRL

330-2-00: Purpose
In accordance with 5 CFR Parts 302 and 330, this Instruction outlines the Department of Health and Human Service’s (Department or HHS) Priority Placement Programs (PPP) covering CTAP, ICTAP, RPL, and PRL. It outlines the career transition services available to eligible employees affected by downsizing, reorganization, restructuring, or other similar events. This policy should be used with the references listed in this Instruction.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

330-2-10: References
5 CFR Part 302, Employment in the Excepted Service
5 CFR Part 330, Subpart A, Filling Positions in the Competitive Service
5 CFR Part 330, Subpart B, Reemployment Priority List (RPL)
5 CFR Part 330, Subpart F, Agency Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP)
5 CFR Part 330, Subpart G, Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP)
5 CFR Part 351, Reduction in Force
5 CFR §353.110(b), Restoration to Duty from Compensable Injury
5 CFR Part 930, Subpart B, Administrative Law Judge Program
HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service
HHS Instruction 351-1, Reduction in Force
HHS Instruction 990-1, Workplace Flexibilities
HHS Instruction 1104-1, Delegated Examining Operations

330-2-20: Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage
The provisions of this Instruction apply to HHS competitive and certain excepted service employees who are eligible for priority selection under CTAP and ICTAP at grades GS-15 or below (or equivalent).
This Instruction also applies to current and/or former HHS employees eligible for priority reemployment consideration via the RPL (competitive service) or PRL (excepted service) programs.
Administrative Law Judges are covered in accordance with the regulations covering these positions.
Exclusions
This Instruction does not apply to Schedule C (political) excepted service employees or employees on time-limited appointments.
The provisions in this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment for bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71, and any such actions may require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees.  When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements of any applicable Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA), the CBA takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
