
These registrants remain on the RPL for positions with a representative rate higher than the offered position up to the grade and pay level last held until their eligibility expires or otherwise terminates.
Required Evidence for RPL Removal: Evidence must be maintained by the HR Center for any reason for removal. To remove an individual because of a failure to reply to a specific permanent job offer or an inquiry of availability for a specific permanent vacancy, evidence is required showing the offer, inquiry, or scheduled interview was made in writing and clearly stated that failure to reply will result in removal from the RPL for the grades and pay levels specified under reasons above (5 CFR §330.204(f)).
Declination of a time-limited appointment does not affect RPL eligibility.
OPM may extend the registration period based on a request from either HHS or the RPL eligible when a RPL eligible does not receive a full 2 years of placement priority due to administrative or procedural error. Extension requests must describe the error. HR Centers who receive such a request from an employee should forward it to the ASA/OHR PPC for OPM approval. OPM’s decision is not subject to appeal (5 CFR §330.208(b)).
Applying RPL Selection Priority. In accordance with 5 CFR §§330.202, 330.210, and 330.213:
Unless the personnel action is one of the exceptions listed in Appendix C of this Instruction, HR Centers must select qualified RPL registrants for competitive service vacancies before hiring outside HHS’ permanent competitive service workforce when:
The position is permanent or time limited to be filled by a competitive service appointment; and
There are RPL eligibles registered for the position at the grade or pay level and commuting area of the vacant position. (If the position is available at multiple grade levels, RPL applies at the grade or pay level in which the position is filled.)
When the position has been advertised with a duty location as ‘Anywhere in the U.S. (or equivalent) or ‘Location is Negotiable After Selection, U.S.’, HR Centers must give selection priority to all qualified RPL eligibles registered for the position at the grade or pay level, regardless of their official duty location.
Covered actions include new appointments, reinstatements, reemployment, and transfers as defined in 5 CFR §210.102; conversions as defined in OPM’s Guide to Processing Personnel Actions (5 CFR §330.202); and appointments under a noncompetitive appointing authority (5 CFR §330.210(c)).
HR Centers use category rating procedures to evaluate RPL eligibles separately from other candidates, in accordance with HHS Instruction 1104-1, Delegated Examining Operations.
The HHS RPL must be checked at initial announcement. See Section 330-2-110, RPL and PRL List Management.
Order of selection when filling vacancies open to candidates outside HHS:
CTAP
RPL
ICTAP
All other external candidates
HR Centers must document if there are no RPL eligibles for a vacancy when issuing a certificate.
RPL registrants have appeal rights to the MSPB if they believe their reemployment rights were violated, in accordance with 5 CFR §330.214.
330-2-100: Priority Reemployment List (PRL)
Purpose. The HHS’ Priority Reemployment List covers former excepted service employees, in accordance with 5 CFR §§302.303 and 302.304(a) and this Instruction. The PRL provides selection priority to former HHS excepted service employees, who are subject to the provisions of Title 5, United States Code (U.S.C.), and who were furloughed or separated under RIF or compensable injury; or received an MSPB decision based on an appeal of an adverse action, where the MSPB found the employee was unjustifiably dismissed but is not entitled to immediate restoration under the MSPB’s decision.

An HHS-wide PRL will be established for each commuting area and excepted service authority in which OpDivs/StaffDivs have PRL eligibles. HHS OpDivs/StaffDivs within the same commuting area use a single PRL for each excepted service authority and must give selection priority to qualified PRL eligibles for excepted service positions before referring other excepted service candidates for consideration (5 CFR §302.304(a)), unless the action is one of the exceptions listed in Appendix D of this Instruction.
