
330-2-90:  Reemployment Priority List (RPL)
Purpose. HHS’ Reemployment Priority List (RPL) covers competitive service employees, in accordance with 5 CFR Part 330, Subpart B, and this Instruction. The RPL provides selection priority to current and former HHS competitive service employees who will be/were separated under RIF, or who have recovered from a compensable work-related injury after more than one (1) year.

An HHS-wide RPL will be established for each commuting area in which OpDivs/StaffDivs have RPL eligibles. HHS OpDivs/StaffDivs within the same commuting area use a single RPL and must give selection priority to RPL eligibles for most permanent or time-limited competitive service positions before hiring outside HHS’ permanent competitive service workforce, unless the action is one of the exceptions listed in Appendix C of this Instruction.
RPL Eligible. In accordance with 5 CFR §§330.201 and 203:

For RPL eligibility under 5 CFR Part 351(RIF):
A current HHS competitive service employee in Tenure Group I or II with a RIF separation notice or a Certificate of Expected Separation under RIF; or
A former HHS competitive service employee in Tenure Group I or II separated by RIF;
Has received a performance rating of record of at least fully successful or equivalent as their most recent performance rating; and
Has not declined an offer of employment under RIF (5 CFR 351, Subpart G) with the same type of work schedule and with a representative rate at least as high as the position from which the employee will be separated. OR
For RPL eligibility under 5 CFR Part 353 (restoration to duty from compensable injury):
A former HHS competitive service employee fully recovered from a compensable injury (described under 5 CFR Part 353) more than 1 year after compensation began;
Serving in or separated from an appointment in the competitive service in Tenure Group I or II;
Either accepted a position at a lower grade or pay level in lieu of separation or was separated because of a compensable injury or disability; and
Received notification from the Department of Labor that injury compensation benefits have ended or will end.
Registration.
Timeframe. Employees who are eligible for the RPL must register within the following timeframes, in accordance with 5 CFR §330.206:
On or before the RIF separation date, or
Within 30 days after the date of injury compensation benefits stop; or the date Department of Labor denies an appeal for continuation of injury compensation benefits.
Positions. In accordance with 5 CFR §§330.204(d), 330.205, 330.207 and 330.212:
Employees must submit information to their servicing HR Center within the registration timeframe specifying the positions and conditions they will accept, including occupation(s), series, grade(s), work schedule (full-time, part-time, seasonal, or intermittent), and minimum hours of work per week.
Employees may register for positions within the local commuting area, and at the same pay level with a representative rate no higher than the position from which the registrant was/will be separated.
RPL eligibles may specify conditions they will accept, including:
Additional occupation(s) and series;
Grades lower than the position from which the registrant was/will be separated;
Work schedules (full-time, part-time, seasonal, or intermittent);
Minimum hours of work per week, as applicable, and
Specific OpDivs/StaffDivs within same local commuting area in which registered.
HHS employees who have fully recovered from a compensable injury after one (1) year may register for positions in another commuting area, upon request, if there is an existing RPL for requested area. The HR Center PPC must confirm that the requested commuting area is available in the HHS HRIT system prior to permitting this option. Requests to register for positions HHS-wide are not permitted.
If an RPL eligible agreed to transfer with their function under RIF but will be separated by RIF from the new position, registration is limited to the RPL for the new local commuting area.
If an RPL eligible was/will be, separated from an overseas position appointed via 5 CFR Part 301, registration is limited to the local commuting area where the employee was/will be separated, unless the OpDiv/StaffDiv approves a written request from the RPL eligible to register for another area within the U.S. that is mutually acceptable to both the employee and the Division.
Registration Form. HR Centers may develop a form for employees to use, request employees to include the position information on their resumes, or require the information be submitted in some other format. These instructions must be provided to employees during the orientation session described in Section 330-2-50 of this Instruction, or when the HR Center issues a RIF separation notice or Certification of Expected Separation under RIF; when the employee accepts a lower grade or pay level; or is separated because of a compensable work-related injury.
Application Guidance. HR Centers must be available to provide RPL eligibles guidance on how to register and help identify the positions for which they are eligible and qualified.
RPL Eligibility Period. In accordance with 5 CFR §§330.208 and 330.209, eligibility expires:
Two (2) years from either the date of the RIF separation, or the date the former employee is registered on the RPL due to recovery from a compensable work-related injury; or
On the date the RPL registrant is removed from the list for one of the following reasons:
Registrants are removed from the RPL at all registered grades and pay levels if:
The registrant declines or fails to reply to an offer of a career, career-conditional, or excepted appointment position without time limit, with the same work schedule and pay level with a representative rate at least as high as the position from which the registrant was or will be separated (see D.2.c. below for required evidence);
Receives a written cancellation, rescission, or modification to a RIF separation notice or Certification of Expected Separation so the employee no longer meets the conditions of a RPL registrant, or an injury compensation benefit notice stating the employee continues to receive injury compensation benefits;
Separates from HHS for any other reason (such as retirement, resignation, or interagency transfer) before the RIF separation effective date. Registration continues if the registrant retires on or after the RIF separation effective date. This reason for removal does not apply to registrants eligible due to a compensable injury;
Requests their servicing HR Center to remove their name from the RPL;
Is placed in a position without time limit at any grade or pay level within HHS; or
Is placed in a position via a career, career-conditional, or excepted appointment without time limit at any grade or pay level in any federal agency.
Registrants are removed from the RPL at lower registered grades or pay levels than the last grade or pay level held, if the offered position is below the last grade or pay level held and the registrant:
Declines or fails to reply to an offer of a career, career-conditional, or excepted appointment without time limit for a position meeting acceptable conditions identified by registrant; or
Declines or fails to reply to a scheduled interview. (See D.2.c. below for required evidence.)
