330-2-40: Roles and Responsibilities
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding priority placement and career transition assistance consistent with HHS and OPM policy and guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Designates Departmental Priority Placement Coordinator(s) (PPC) to administer the HHS Priority Placement Programs (PPP) and provide program and HRIT oversight of the HHS-wide RPL and PRL lists, consistent with HHS policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.
Periodically conducts accountability reviews of OpDiv/StaffDiv career transition and HHS PPP activities to ensure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads or their written designee(s):
Comply with applicable federal laws, regulations, and collective bargaining agreements covering career transition programs and services.
Provide resources to assist employees eligible for career transition services, in accordance with this Instruction and consultation with their servicing HR Center.
Ensure employees are advised of organizational actions that will adversely impact them as early as possible, and support authorizing excused absence to the extent practicable, so employee(s) can use available resources to find continuing employment.
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers:
Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy and guidance, collective bargaining agreements, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Provide career transition services to eligible employees in accordance with this Instruction, including providing reasonable accommodation to employees with disabilities, as appropriate.
Develop internal procedures to administer the HHS PPP within their serviced OpDiv/StaffDiv and to provide selection priority to employees and former employees.
Designate OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC(s) to administer the day-to-day aspects of the PPP for their serviced Division.
Coordinate priority placement program initiatives with other OpDivs/StaffDivs and other Federal, state, and local employers.
Resolve qualification disputes within their respective serviced Division and submit requests for dispute resolution between HR Centers to ASA/OHR for decision. The request for a decision may be submitted by the gaining or losing HR Center. Still, the request must contain a written assessment of the issues, relevant documentation, and a recommendation.
330-2-50: Career Transition Services
The following career transition services are provided to current HHS employees affected by downsizing, reorganization, restructuring, or other similar events, as required by 5 CFR §§330.603(c) and 330.608:



Employee Information. OpDivs/StaffDivs must provide its eligible employee’s written information on CTAP selection priority, including eligibility period; how to find and apply to vacancies, including proof of eligibility; and the HHS definition of ‘Well Qualified;’ within the following timeframes:
For RIF actions, OpDivs/StaffDivs must notify at least 60 full days before the effective date of the release unless OPM has approved an exception to an HHS request for a shorter notice period consistent with 5 CFR 351, Subpart H, and HHS Instruction 351-1, RIF.
For removal actions for declining a directed geographic relocation, HR Centers should consult their servicing labor/employee relations staff and provide written selection priority information at the earliest opportunity prior to removal, so the employee(s) can use available career transition services to find continuing employment.
Orientation Session. OpDivs/StaffDivs are required to provide a career transition ‘orientation session’ to its eligible employees with information on their eligibility for selection priority under HHS’ Priority Placement Programs and career transition services available. An orientation session may be in-person or web-based and includes the following:
Information on HHS’ RPL or PRL, as applicable, including eligibility period; how to register; MSPB appeal rights, etc. (See Sections 330-2-90 and 100 of this Instruction);
Information on ICTAP, including information on eligibility for selection priority for competitive service positions at other federal agencies, eligibility period, and how to find and apply to vacancies (See Section 330-2-70 of this Instruction);
Available excused absence for career transition-related activities;
Availability of equipment, facilities, materials, and resources, including for those with disabilities, in field offices, remote locations, etc.;
Federal, State, or local resources available to support career transition, including for those with disabilities;
Training or retraining opportunities via HHS Learning Management System, Department of Labor via state employment offices, or other public and private sector opportunities;
If the OpDiv/StaffDiv notifies Federal agencies in the local commuting area or provides employment referrals, give employees the option to authorize the release of their resume or other relevant employment information to public and private sector employers, as required by 5 CFR §351.803;
How to apply for State unemployment insurance benefits;
Estimate of severance pay (if eligible); and
Advise employees of their responsibility to notify their servicing HR Center of changes in their contact information and when they have received a valid job offer.
Use of Excused Absence. Each affected employee who requests excused absence may be granted up to 40 hours of administrative leave to use career transition assistance, including attending training or retaining opportunities; filling job applications; job interviews, etc. Additional time may be provided as warranted by individual situations, subject to supervisory approval and workload priorities. Interviews within HHS and the commuting area may be considered other official functions. OpDivs/StaffDivs may reimburse employees for travel expenses related to career transition activities. Supervisors should monitor the use of excused absence to ensure that time authorized is used for approved purposes.
Access to Services and Facilities. To the extent practicable and within available funding, surplus and displaced HHS employees are provided the following:
Skills assessment, resume preparation, job search assistance, and counseling, including information on the availability of the HHS Employee Assistance Program for stress, transition, and financial management.
Career transition services, equipment, facilities, materials, and resources to maximize placement opportunities.
Information on the availability of OpDiv/StaffDiv career transition services and facilities and how to access them, including any changes in the level and kind of services offered.
Access to facilities and career transition assistance for former employees for at least 90 days after the date of separation.
330-2-60: Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP)
Purpose. HHS’ Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP) covers surplus and displaced HHS employees per 5 CFR Part 330, Subpart F, and this Instruction. The program provides current HHS employees a way to transition into a vacant position within the Department if they will be separated, through no fault of their own, due to downsizing, reorganization, restructuring, or other similar events. CTAP candidates are given selection priority for vacancies within the local commuting area before other internal or external candidates are selected for vacancies (5 CFR §330.604).
