
330-2-110: RPL and PRL List Management
HHS Priority Placement Programs (PPP) lists include the Reemployment Priority List (RPL) and Priority Reemployment List (PRL) and are available via an HHS HRIT system.
ASA/OHR and OpDiv/StaffDiv PPCs will have access to the HHS HRIT system to oversee and manage the lists.
ASA/OHR oversees all Department-wide PPP programs, including the RPL and PRL lists; resolves issues or disputes among two or more HR Centers; establishes new lists, and periodically reviews lists to ensure registrants meet eligibility requirements.
An HHS-wide RPL will be established by the ASA/OHR for each commuting area in which OpDivs/StaffDivs have RPL-eligible competitive service employees. All OpDivs/StaffDivs within the same commuting area use a single RPL. They are responsible for clearing the HHS PRL at initial announcement before hiring outside HHS’ permanent competitive service workforce.
An HHS-wide PRL will be established by the ASA/OHR for each commuting area and excepted service authority in which OpDivs/StaffDivs have PRL-eligible excepted service employees. All OpDivs/StaffDivs within the same commuting area use a single PRL for each excepted service authority and are responsible for clearing the HHS PRL when filling excepted service positions.
Each OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC is responsible for administering the day-to-day aspects of the PPP lists for their serviced OpDiv/StaffDiv, including:
Tracking employees eligible for RPL or PRL priority selection for their serviced division to ensure their employees receive the career transition services described in this Instruction.
Notifying the ASA/OHR when a new list(s) described under D. and E. above needs to be established based on employee eligibility within their serviced division.
Entering RPL and PRL registrants on lists no later than ten calendar days after receiving the information/application, the employee was or will be separated by the local commuting area. All OpDivs/StaffDivs within the same local commuting area use a single RPL and/or PRL.
In addition, PRL registrants are entered on the PRL list(s) by the excepted service appointing authority from which the employee was separated or last served (i.e., there may be more than 1 PRL within a local commuting area if HHS excepted employees serving on different excepted authorities are eligible for reemployment consideration).
Entering the employee’s eligibility period, i.e., qualifying event date and expiration date.
Entering the conditions under which the HHS employee will accept reemployment, i.e., occupation(s), series, grades, work schedule (full-time, part-time, seasonal, or intermittent), and minimum hours of work per week, as applicable.
Making any necessary changes, such as an updated resume, conditions, contact information, etc., provided by the employee within ten calendar days of receipt. Updated qualifications or conditions for accepting positions apply to vacancies after the HR Center updates the RPL/PRL candidate’s information (i.e., ten calendar days after receipt).
Clearing the HHS RPL and PRL, as applicable, when filling vacancies.
Removing their division’s RPL and PRL registrants from the list(s) when the registrants’ eligibility expires.
Ensuring documentation is maintained in recruitment case files showing the OpDiv/StaffDiv has met its RPL or PRL selection priority requirements sufficient for third-party reconstruction.
Resolving qualification disputes within their respective serviced division and submitting requests for dispute resolution between HR Centers to the ASA/OHR for decision. The request for a decision may be submitted by the gaining or losing HR Center. Still, the request must contain a written assessment of the issues, relevant documentation, and a recommendation.
CTAP and ICTAP. The CTAP and ICTAP regulations require candidates to apply for a specific vacancy to receive priority consideration.
HR Centers must track surplus and displaced employees for their serviced division to ensure its employees who are eligible for CTAP and ICTAP receive the career transition services described in this Instruction.
HR Centers ensure documentation is maintained in recruitment case files showing that OpDiv/StaffDiv has met its CTAP/ICTAP selection priority requirements sufficient for third-party reconstruction.
HR Centers must notify OpDiv/StaffDiv PPCs, with supporting documentation, when a CTAP candidate is no longer eligible for further priority consideration. For example, if the CTAP candidate who is employed at FDA declines a CDC job offer, the CDC PPC will notify FDA PPC. The employing office PPC will then notify the CTAP candidate that their CTAP eligibility has ended and the basis for it. (See Section 330-2-60, Period of Eligibility, for events that end CTAP eligibility.)
330-2-120: Documentation and Accountability
Records associated with meeting CTAP, ICTAP, RPL, and PRL selection priority requirements, including documentation sufficient for third-party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule. Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification from OPM, Department othe f Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, resolved, and closed.
ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Appendix A: Exceptions to CTAP Selection (5 CFR §330.609)
An OpDiv/StaffDiv may take the following actions as exceptions to CTAP selection:
