
HHS Summary Level Pattern	Rating Levels	Rating Pattern	Years of Service for Retention
H	5	Outstanding	20
H	4	Achieved More Than Expected Results	16
H	3	Achieved Expected Results	12
H	2	Partially Achieved	0
H	1	Unacceptable/Unsatisfactory	0
An employee who does not have three (3) ratings of record is granted service credit for performance in accordance with 5 CFR §351.504(c) and the modal rating definition in this Instruction.
Indian Health Service (IHS).  When a RIF is conducted in IHS, retention registers for competitive and excepted service employees are combined in accordance with 25 U.S.C. §5117.
Administrative Law Judges.  To determine retention standing for Administrative Law Judges, see 5 CFR §930.210.
Release From Competitive Level.
OpDiv/StaffDivs determine each employee’s retention standing as of the effective date of the RIF, except for the following:
Mandatory exceptions listed under 5 CFR §351.606;
Permissive continuing exceptions under 5 CFR §351.607; and
Permissive temporary exceptions listed under 5 CFR §351.608.
The reasons for any exceptions used must be recorded on the retention register.
Employees are released in the inverse order of their retention standing, beginning with the employee with the lowest retention standing on the retention register, in accordance with 5 CFR Part 351, Subpart F, and OPM’s Workforce Reshaping Operations Handbook.
OpDiv/StaffDivs may not release a competing employee from a competitive level while retaining in that level an employee with a lower retention standing, except as specified by 5 CFR §351.601.
Before releasing a competing employee from a competitive level, the OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Center, releases all employees within that level who are listed under 5 CFR §351.602 and A.3. above.
OpDivs/StaffDivs may furlough a competing employee (i.e., place employee(s) in a non-duty, non-pay status more than 30 calendar days, or for more than 22 discontinuous workdays), in accordance with 5 CFR §351.604.
When all positions within a competitive area will be abolished within 180 days, employees are released in the order described in 5 CFR §351.605.
Assignment Rights (5 CFR Part 351, Subpart G).
An employee who is released from a competitive level is offered assignment to another position. If the employee accepts, the employee is assigned to the position offered. If the employee does not accept, the employee is furloughed or separated.
The existence of an available position does not require the OpDiv/StaffDiv to offer an employee a particular position; however, as specified in 5 CFR §351.701, an available position establishes the employee’s right to be offered a position that has no reduction, or the least possible reduction, in representative rate; is in the same competitive area; be at least 3 months in duration; and have the same type of work schedule as the position from which the employee is released.
The promotion potential of the offered position is not a consideration in determining an employee’s assignment rights to an available position; however, the employee must be qualified for the position, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.701.
Qualification determinations are made in accordance with 5 CFR §351.702.  If an OpDiv/StaffDiv determines, on the basis of evidence, that a 30% compensably disabled preference eligible employee is unable to perform the physical requirements of a position to which the employee would have otherwise been assigned, a request is submitted to ASA/OHR for final OPM determination and, upon notice from OHR that the request was sent to OPM, the OpDiv/StaffDiv notifies the employee in writing of the reasons of the decision within 15 days and before any other employee is selected for the position, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.702(d).
An OpDiv/StaffDiv Head, in consultation with their HR Center, may waive qualification requirements if s/he elects to assign employee(s) to vacant position(s), in lieu of furloughing or separating, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.703, if the employee has the capacity, adaptability, and skills needs to perform the duties of the vacant position and meets the minimum education requirements for the position.
HHS does not elect to adopt the discretionary assignment actions under 5 CFR §351.705(a)(1-2) that permit a competing employee to displace an employee with a lower retention standing in the same subgroup, or displace an employee in a higher subgroup.
In accordance with 5 CFR §351.705, HHS excepted service employees are provided assignment rights to other excepted positions under the same appointment authority.
Upon accepting an offer of assignment, or displacing another employee, the employee retains the same status and tenure in the new position.
Grade and Pay Retention: Employees who are downgraded after receiving a specific RIF notice and accept a lower-graded position offered by management are entitled to grade retention and retain the grade held immediately before the reduction for a period of two (2) years, if the employee(s) served at least 52 consecutive weeks at the higher grade. Additionally, employees who are placed in a lower-graded position by a reclassification action described in this Instruction are also eligible for grade retention on the same basis as employees who are voluntarily downgraded.  The retained grade is treated as the employee’s grade for all purposes (e.g., pay, retirement and life insurance, eligibility for training and promotion).  After grade retention expires, employees are eligible for indefinite pay retention.  Employees who do not meet the eligibility requirements for grade retention (i.e., have not served at least 52 consecutive weeks at the higher grade at the time of downgrading) are also eligible for pay retention. See 5 U.S.C. Subchapter VI, and 5 CFR Part 536 for additional guidance.  Title 38 Market Pay Positions are not entitled to grade or pay retention; however, employees are given pay retention in some circumstances as described in OPM Title 38 Delegation to HHS.



351-1-110 Specific RIF Notices
Before issuing RIF notices to employees informing them that they will be impacted by RIF, OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads notify the ASA/OHR of any RIF within their Division, in accordance with this Instruction.
OpDiv/StaffDivs adhere to the procedures described in 5 CFR Part 351, Subpart H, and this Instruction when issuing RIF notices.
When 50 or more employees in a competitive area are to be separated, the OpDiv/StaffDiv must notify ASA/OHR in writing before satisfying the notice requirements under 5 CFR §351.803(b).  A memo to the Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA) includes the information listed in 5 CFR §351.803(c).  After review, ASA/OHR informs the OpDiv/StaffDiv when notice is sent to OPM to coordinate the release of both notification and separation notices as specified under 5 CFR §351.803(b).
When a RIF is caused by an unforeseeable situation, the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head must submit a request to the ASA/OHR for OPM approval to provide employees a specific RIF notice of less than 60 days, but at least 30 days, before the effective date of release.  Such requests include the information specified in 5 CFR §351.801(b).
An employee is entitled to a RIF notice of at least 60 full days if the OpDiv/StaffDiv decides to take an action more severe than first specified (5 CFR §351.805).  If the negotiated agreement or union contract specifies a longer time frame, the time frame(s) in the agreement are followed.
To assist employees in career transition and placement assistance prior to RIF separation, OpDiv/StaffDivs may issue Certificates of Expected Separation after the appropriate HHS leadership officials are notified in accordance with this Instruction and when the conditions specified under 5 CFR §351.807 are met.  Such certificates are signed by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head, unless otherwise instructed by the Office of the Secretary.
