
OPM Title 38 Delegation to HHS, effective through June 30, 2022
OPM VetGuide
OPM Workforce Reshaping Operations Handbook - PDF
351-1-30 Definitions
Adjusted Service Computation Date.  An employee's service computation date plus credit for her/his three most recent annual performance ratings of record (5 CFR §351.503).  The adjusted SCD is only used for RIF purposes.
Agency.  For the purposes of this Instruction, an agency is defined as an HHS OpDiv/StaffDiv with human resources (HR) authority, unless otherwise noted.
Assignment rights (Bump and Retreat).  An employee's entitlement to displace another employee with lower retention standing. In accordance with 5 CFR §351.705, HHS excepted service employees are provided assignment rights to other excepted positions under the same appointment authority.
Available Position.  As defined in 5 CFR §351.701(a), an available position that satisfies an employee’s RIF assignment right must meet all the following criteria:
Be in the competitive service;
Be in the same competitive area as the position the individual currently occupies;
Last at least 3 months;
Be a position for which the released employee qualifies, unless the OpDiv/StaffDiv, at its discretion, chooses to waive qualifications in offering the employee assignment to a vacant position;
Have a representative rate that is equal to or less than the position held by the released employee;
Be occupied by a lower-standing employee in a different competitive level who can be displaced by the released employee by bumping rights, or by retreating rights; and
Have the same type of work schedule (full-time, part-time, intermittent, seasonal, or on-call) as the position from which the higher-standing employee is released.
Career Transition Assistance Plan (CTAP) as defined in 5 CFR Part 330, Subpart F and HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, provides eligible surplus and displaced HHS employees selection priority for HHS competitive service vacancies for which there are active recruitment actions.
Competing Employee.  An employee in tenure group I, II, or III, in either the competitive or excepted service (5 CFR §351.203).
Competitive Area.  The geographic and organizational boundaries within which employees compete in a RIF (5 CFR §351.402).  Competitive areas are determined by the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s Human Resource Director, with approval by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head.
Competitive Level.  A group of positions with the same grade and occupational series, and similar duties, qualifications requirements, and working conditions.  Separate competitive levels are established for competitive and excepted service positions; excepted service appointing authorities; and for positions in different pay schedules, work schedules, and trainee status (5 CFR §351.403). The OpDiv/StaffDiv must establish separate competitive levels for positions in the competitive service, and for positions in the excepted service.  Employees who hold excepted service appointments in competitive service positions (e.g., Veterans Recruitment Appointments (VRA)) compete for retention in the excepted service, but do not compete for retention with employees who hold the same positions under competitive service appointments.
Competitive Service.  All civil service positions in the executive branch, except (1) positions which are specifically excepted from the competitive service by or under statute; (2) positions to which appointments are made by nomination for confirmation by the Senate, unless the Senate otherwise directs; and (3) positions in the Senior Executive Service (5 CFR §212.101).
Days.  Calendar days (5 CFR §351.203).
Excepted Service.  Civil service positions that are not in the competitive service or the Senior Executive Service (5 CFR §213.101).
Function.  All, or a clearly identifiable segment, of an agency’s mission (including all integral parts of that mission), regardless of how it is performed (5 CFR §351.203).
Furlough Under RIF Procedures.  The placement of an employee in a temporary nonduty and nonpay status for more than 30 consecutive calendar days, or more than 22 discontinuous workdays, but not more than 1 year (5 CFR §351.203).
Interagency Career Transition Assistance Plan (ICTAP) as defined in 5 CFR Part 330, Subpart G and HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, provides eligible displaced HHS employees selection priority for competitive service vacancies at other Federal agencies, and provides eligible displaced employees of other Federal agencies selection priority for HHS competitive service vacancies for which there are active recruitment actions.
Local Commuting Area.  The geographic area that usually constitutes one area for employment purposes; any population center (or two or more neighboring ones) and surrounding localities in which employees live and can be reasonably expected to travel back and forth daily to their place of employment (5 CFR §351.203).  There is no mileage standard.
Modal Rating.  OPM has determined that an employee who has no rating of record during the 4-year period will receive the modal rating, i.e., the summary rating level assigned most frequently within the competitive area and on record for the most recently completed appraisal period prior to the cutoff date specified (5 CFR §§351.203 and 504(c)(1)).  However, in most instances, every employee in the competitive area should have at least one (1) rating of record during the last four (4) years.  If at least one rating exists, a modal rating is not required.
Priority Reemployment List (PRL) as defined in 5 CFR Part 302.303 and HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, the mechanism used to give reemployment consideration and placement assistance to former HHS excepted service employees who have been furloughed or separated by RIF; have fully recovered from compensable injury after one (1) year; or received a Merit Systems Protection Board decision based on an appeal of an adverse action.