
351-1-40 Responsibilities
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding RIF in accordance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Reviews and submits requests to OPM for approval of Voluntary Early Retirement Authority (VERA) and/or Voluntary Separation Incentive Payments (VSIP) to minimize the impact of a downsizing and/or reshaping.
Notifies OPM in writing of any RIF involving 50 or more employees within a competitive area at the same time specific notices of separation are issued to employees by the OpDiv/StaffDiv(s).
Submits requests to OPM for approval to establish or change a competitive area within 90 days of the effective date of a RIF.
Submits requests to the Director of OPM to provide employees a specific RIF notice of less than 60 days, but at least 30 days, before the effective date of release when a RIF is caused by unforeseeable situation, e.g., a natural disaster.
Requests final determination from OPM that a 30% compensably disabled preference eligible employee selected for release from a competitive level is unable to perform the physical requirements of a position to which the employee would have otherwise been assigned.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads with HR Authority:
Comply with this Instruction; applicable HHS, OPM, and Office of Management and Budget (OMB) supplemental guidance; and federal laws and regulations.
Assess workforce requirements, based on mission and budget, to determine if a RIF is necessary, what functions/position(s) will be abolished, what positions will remain, and when a RIF will take place.
Notify ASA/OHR in advance of workforce restructuring measures, including a reorganization, transfer of function, RIF, or furlough covered by this Instruction.  (Depending on the scope of the proposed action(s), the ASA will notify the Secretary and/or OPM.)
Submit requests to ASA/OHR for OPM approval of VERA and/or VSIP authority.
In consultation with their Human Resources Center (HR Center), may modify or waive qualification requirements if s/he elects to reassign employees to vacant positions to avoid a RIF, or in lieu of furloughing or separating an employee, if the employee has the capacity, adaptability, and skills needs to perform the duties of the vacant position and meets the minimum education requirements for the position (5 CFR §351.703).  This responsibility may not be redelegated below the Human Resources Director.
Ensure the development of RIF plans and procedures within their Division, including a RIF communications plan for disseminating information and communicating with unions, leadership, employees and other stakeholders on a regular basis.
Before a RIF is announced, approve the competitive areas and competitive levels within their Division.
Submit requests to ASA/OHR for OPM approval to establish a competitive area within 90 days prior to the effective date of a RIF.
Submit requests to ASA/OHR for OPM approval to provide employees a specific RIF notice of less than 60 calendar days, but at least 30 calendar days, before the effective date of release when RIF is caused by an unforeseeable situation.
In consultation with their HR Center, may elect to make exceptions to the order of release in accordance with 5 CFR §§351.607 and 608.  This responsibility may not be redelegated below the Human Resources Director.
Ensure existing labor agreements are reviewed and comply with bargaining obligations.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resource Directors:
Oversee the development and implementation of an internal RIF plan and ensure RIF plans, procedures, and practices comply with this Instruction; applicable HHS, OPM, and Office of Management and Budget (OMB) supplemental guidance and policy; collective bargaining agreements, and federal laws and regulations.
Determine and establish competitive areas and competitive levels, with approval of the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head.
Ensure notification periods in applicable collective bargaining agreements are negotiated with union representatives.
Protect the mutual interests of the Department and the rights of the employees when engaging in RIF activities.
Prepare requests to ASA/OHR for OPM approval of VERA and/or VSIP authority.
Prepare notifications to ASA/OHR when 50 or more employees in a competitive area will receive separation notices, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.803 and this Instruction.
Prepare requests to ASA/OHR for OPM approval to establish a competitive area within 90 days prior to the effective date of a RIF.
Prepare requests to ASA/OHR for OPM approval to provide employees a specific RIF notice of less than 60 days, but at least 30 days, before the effective date of release when a RIF is caused by an unforeseeable situation, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.801(b).
Submit requests to ASA/OHR for final OPM determination that a 30% compensably disabled preference eligible employee is unable to perform the physical requirements of a position to which the employee would have otherwise been assigned; and upon notice from OHR that the request has been sent to OPM, notifies the employee in writing of the reasons of the decision within 15 days of the request and before any other employee is selected for the position, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.702(d).
Ensure employee personnel records are accurate and that employees impacted by RIF are provided the opportunity to review their records and retention registers that affect them.
Develop a RIF communication plan for disseminating information, and communicating with employees, unions, and other stakeholders on a regular basis.
Ensure employees are advised of available priority placement programs and career transition services, as outlined in HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, as soon as it is known that a RIF is likely, or at minimum, at least 60 full days before the effective date of release (or shorter notice period, if an exception is approved by OPM).
Ensure maintenance of records necessary to preserve rights and benefits granted by federal laws and regulations.
Prepare reports on RIF and any other reorganization actions authorized under this Instruction for submission to ASA/OHR and/or OPM, as required.