
351-1-70 Reduction in Force Planning – Competitive Areas
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers must establish and document the competitive area(s) within their respective Division prior to RIF, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.402 and this Instruction.
The competitive area defines the scope of RIF competition.  Employees in a competitive area compete for retention only with other employees in the same competitive area.
 
Image
A graph explaining key terms found in policy, i.e., competitive area and competitive level
The competitive area includes all employees within the organizational unit(s) and geographical location(s) within the local commuting area.
The minimum competitive area is an organizational unit independent from other organizational units within a local commuting area because of differences in work function, staff, and separate administration (or the ability of managers within the organizational unit to authorize personnel actions, including ability to establish and abolish positions, assign duties, etc.).
There is no maximum size for a competitive area; however large competitive areas typically result in a more expensive RIF due to payment of relocation costs for employees placed in positions outside their duty commuting area, state, etc.
When an OpDiv/StaffDiv has offices in more than one local commuting area, each local commuting area may be designated as a separate competitive area.
A separate competitive area is established for each Inspector General Activity covered by the Inspector General Act of 1978, P.L. 95-452, as amended, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.402(d).
Telecommuters. An employee who telecommutes competes in RIF on the basis of the duty station or work site documented for the employee’s official position of record.  The same definition and standards for competitive areas in 5 CFR §351.402 apply to work performed directly on-site as to work performed remotely or by telecommuters.  OpDivs/StaffDivs still draw geographical and organizational boundaries using the regulatory minimum standard.  This could mean that geographically dispersed employees are in the same organizational unit, but in different local commuting areas.  OpDivs/StaffDivs then must decide, after meeting the minimum standard, how wide they want to open up the RIF competitive areas.
Example: An organizational unit is defined as the competitive area and the unit has 15 employees, with 10 located in Washington, DC and 5 full-time telecommuters in Atlanta, GA. There are two options for the competitive area in this example – 1) The telecommuters can compete in the same competitive area as the 10 employees located in Washington, DC (relocation costs are then a consideration as the employee may have to move to Washington, DC), or 2) A separate competitive area may be established for those 5 employees in Atlanta.

Establishing the scope of RIF competition, or Competitive Area, is to balance RIF manageability, cost factors, and the ability to minimize disruption to the mission while optimizing placement opportunities for employees and limiting adverse impact.  Some questions to consider when defining a competitive area:
Is the need for a RIF spread throughout the OpDiv/StaffDiv, or
Is it confined to a particular function or organization?
Is the organization impacted geographically dispersed?
How many positions and people are impacted – a dozen? Several hundred? A few thousand? Is the entire organization being closed?
Can the RIF be reasonably managed using the established competitive area definition?
If the competitive area spans different commuting areas, have relocation costs been accounted for?
When a competitive area is established within 90 days prior to the effective date of a RIF, it must be approved by OPM (5 CFR §351.402(c)).  Requests for OPM approval are sent by the Human Resources Director to ASA/OHR at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov and contain the following information:
Identification of the proposed competitive area, including the organization name, geographic location, and limits to the local commuting area;
A description of how the proposed area differs from the one previously established for the same organizational unit and geographic area;
An organizational chart of the OpDiv/StaffDiv;
The number of competing employees in the proposed competitive area;
A description of the operation, work function, staff, and personnel administration of the proposed area and, where appropriate, a description of how the area is separate from others in these respects; and
A description of the circumstances that led to the proposal to establish a new competitive area less than 90 days before a proposed RIF.
351-1-80 Reduction in Force Planning – Competitive Levels
OpDivs/StaffDivs must establish and document the competitive levels within their respective Division, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.403 and this Instruction (see also Appendix, HHS Competitive Level Codes).  ASA/OHR must concur on the establishment of new competitive levels.
Each competitive level includes all positions within a competitive area that are the same grade, series, and similar duties (based on the official position of record, not the employee’s qualifications), position qualification requirements, pay schedules, and working conditions so the OpDiv/StaffDiv may reassign the incumbent of one position to another position within the competitive level without undue interruption. (Note: Whether or not a security clearance requirement is in the employee’s official position description, separate competitive levels for otherwise interchangeable positions may be established if the clearance approval process would extend more than 90 days past the RIF effective date, resulting in undue interruption.)
Separate competitive levels are established for certain positions: competitive and excepted service; excepted service appointment authority; pay systems; work schedules (e.g., full-time, part-time, seasonal, or intermittent); and positions filled for formally designated trainee or development programs.
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers establish and implement a plan for assigning a competitive level code to positions at the time of classification.  The code is documented on the OF-8 of the position description (PD) and in the enterprise-wide HR and payroll processing system.  Competitive level determinations should be reviewed whenever there is a change in classification or change to the position description (i.e. duties, responsibilities, qualifications, etc.).