
351-1-90 Reduction in Force Planning – Other Required Actions
Leadership Decisions.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads must identify, based on mission and/or budget, which functions/positions must be abolished and which functions/positions will remain (by job title, series, grade, organization, and geographic location).  This information is provided to their servicing HR Center in order to administer the RIF and determine which employees will be impacted.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads must establish a RIF effective date and provide it to their HR Center.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads must decide, in consultation with their HR Center, if temporary employees and/or reemployed annuitants will be terminated before a RIF.
If temporary employees who are not eligible to compete in a RIF (i.e., who are not identified as competing employees under 5 CFR §§351.501(b)(3) and 502((b)(3)) are not terminated prior to a RIF, they are released before a competing employee from the same competitive level is released, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.602.
If reemployed annuitants are not terminated prior to the RIF effective date, they compete in the RIF on the same basis as other employees holding the same type of appointment, per OPM’s Workforce Reshaping Operations Handbook.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads may offer vacant positions to displaced employees, or as offers in lieu of a RIF action (see Section 351-1-60, RIF Planning - Filling Vacancies).
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads, in consultation with their HR Center, may waive qualification requirements to assign an employee to a vacant position, in lieu of furlough or separating, provided the employee meets minimum educational requirements and has the capacity to perform the duties and responsibilities of the position, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.703.
Develop Communications Strategy
Once the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head determines the need for a RIF, OpDivs/StaffDivs must develop a RIF communication plan for disseminating information, and communicating with unions, leadership, employees and other stakeholders on a regular basis.
HR Centers must provide impacted employees access to information concerning RIF procedures, regulations, career assistance programs and services available to surplus and displaced employees, severance pay, and employee benefits and retirement, in accordance with 5 CFR §§351.802(b), 803(a), and HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs.
Employees who have received a specific RIF notice, their representatives, and authorized OPM or HHS official(s) are entitled to inspect the retention register and related records, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.505.
Ensure Personnel Records Are Accurate
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers must manually verify employees’ official position descriptions; three (3) most recent performance ratings of record; creditable federal civilian and military service; service computation date; and veteran preference status before administering a RIF.
Employees should be given opportunity to update their personnel records, including submitting an updated resume.
HR Centers may establish a cut-off date for employees to submit updated personnel information for inclusion in their electronic Official Personnel Files (e-OPF).  (Note: Employees have a 30-day mandatory cut-off prior to issuance of RIF notices to submit performance ratings (e.g., from another agency), after which no new performance ratings are put on record and used for purposes of the RIF. See also Section 351-1-100, RIF Procedures, A.7.b. below.)
HR Centers ensure that any cut-off date is included in their Division’s communications strategy and is widely publicized at least 30 days prior to the deadline for receipt of information.
351-1-100 RIF Procedures
Retention Registers. To determine which employees are impacted by a RIF action, OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers apply the four (4) RIF retention factors (i.e., tenure, veteran preference, performance ratings, and length of service) to each competing employee in the competitive level(s) involved in the RIF, in accordance with 5 CFR Part 351, Subparts D and E.  (The competitive level(s) then becomes the retention register(s) which lists competing employees in the order of their retention standing.)
Competing Employees are employees within the competitive level, and also include employees identified under 5 CFR §§351.404 and 405.
Employees Not Listed on Retention Register.  Employees on military duty with a restoration right are not listed on a retention register, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.404.
Employees Listed Separately from Retention Register.  In accordance with 5 CFR §351.404 and OPM’s Workforce Reshaping Operations Handbook, the following employees who are in the competitive level are listed separately from the retention register(s):
Employees on temporary appointments. If certain temporary employees (i.e., those not identified as competing employees under 5 CFR §§351.501(b)(3) and 502((b)(3)) are not released prior to a RIF, these temporary employees in the competitive level are listed separately from the retention register.
Employees on temporary or term promotions, with the expiration date of their promotion.
Employees who have received a final written decision of removal due to unacceptable performance or an adverse action.
Determining Retention Standing – Tenure (5 CFR §§351.501(a-b) and 502). Competing employees are ranked in descending (i.e., highest to lowest) order according to their tenure (I, II, or III), or type of appointment.
Determining Retention Standing – Veteran Preference (5 CFR §351.501(c)).  Each of the tenure groups are then divided into subgroups based on the competing employee’s veteran preference under RIF procedures.
Determining Retention Standing - Length of Service (5 CFR §351.503).  Within each subgroup, competing employees are then ranked by their respective service dates, including both creditable federal civilian and military service.
Determining Retention Standing – Performance (5 CFR §351.504).  HHS employees receive extra retention service credit for performance based on the average of their last three (3) most recent performance ratings of record during the four (4) year period prior to the 30-day performance cut-off date:
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers adhere to the chart below to apply additional service credit for performance.
A 30-day cut-off date prior to issuance of the RIF notices is established, after which no new performance ratings are put on record and used for purposes of the RIF.
A performance summary rating of record is defined as one that is assigned at the end of the appraisal period that was signed, approved, and issued to the employee by an appropriate management official, or a rating of record assigned following completion of a performance improvement period.
 