351-1-120 Priority Placement Assistance
HHS employees who receive a specific RIF separation notice, Certificate of Expected Separation, or other official certification issued by the Department/OpDiv/StaffDiv; and
Received a performance rating of record of at least fully successful or equivalent as their most recent performance rating; and
Has not declined an offer of employment under RIF procedures (5 CFR Part 351, Subpart G) with the same type of work schedule and with a representative rate at least as high as the position from which the employee was separated, are generally eligible for priority selection for similar positions as described in HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, in accordance with 5 CFR Parts 302 and 330, and 5 CFR §351.803(a).
OpDivs/StaffDivs should consult HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, to determine their responsibility for notifying employees of their eligibility for reemployment and other placement assistance, and provide career transition services.
351-1-130 Appeals and Corrective Actions
Right to Appeal to MSPB.  An employee who has been furloughed for more than 30 days, separated, or demoted by a RIF action has the right to appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) if he or she believes the agency did not properly follow the RIF regulations, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.901.  The appeal must be filed during the 30-day period beginning the day after the effective date of the RIF action. OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers must advise affected employees of their appeal rights to MSPB when the specific RIF notice is issued.
Right to Grieve.  An employee covered by a collective bargaining agreement that covers RIF actions must follow the negotiated grievance procedure outlined in the agreement if the employee believes the agency failed to properly apply the RIF regulations.  If the agreement excludes RIF actions, then the employee may appeal to the MSPB within 30 days after the effective date of the RIF action, but may not use the grievance procedure.  An employee who alleges discrimination under 5 U.S.C. §2302(b)(1) has the option of either filing a grievance under the negotiated grievance procedure or filing an appeal to the MSPB, in accordance with 5 U.S.C. §7121(d).  HR Centers must advise affected employees of their rights when the specific RIF notice is issued.
Corrective Actions.  When an action under this Instruction was unjustified or unwarranted and an individual is restored to the former grade or rate of pay held or to an intermediate grade or rate of pay, the restoration shall be made retroactively effective to the date of the improper action per 5 CFR §351.902.


351-1-140 Documentation and Accountability
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers are responsible for maintaining correct personnel records that are used to determine retention standing and all registers and records related to a RIF for at least one (1) year after the date specific RIF notices are issued, in accordance with 5 CFR §351.505(a) and (f).
Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, or the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved and closed.
ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.
Appendix, HHS Competitive Level Codes
The Competitive Level Codes (CLCs) below uses the first three (3) characters in the CLC field.  The fourth character is used to further identify competitive levels:

Competitive Service
Excepted Service     **Additional CLCs may be used to further define the excepted authority
Full-time
Part-time
Intermittent
Temp or seasonal
Training/Development
[Reserved]
[Reserved]


This appendix does not contain CLCs for the GS-0301 or GS-0303 series since the duties of these positions are generally unique to the organization.  Additionally, most GS-'01' series are omitted.  OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers are responsible for assigning a CLC for these positions in their serviced Division. 

CLC	Position Series	Position Title
SFA	GS-0018	Safety Analyst
SFT	GS-0019	Safety Technician
CPN	GS-0020	Community Planner
EPS	GS-0028	Environmental Planning Specialist
EPT	GS-0029	Environmental Technician
FPI	GS-0072	Fingerprint Identification
CHP	GS-0060	Chaplain
SEC	GS-0080	Security Specialist
FFT	GS-0081	Firefighter
POF	GS-0083	Police Officer
SCG	GS-0085	Security Guard
SCA	GS-0086	Security Assistant
EMS	GS-0089	Emergency Management Specialist
STN	GS-xx99	Student- all series ending in "99"
SSA	GS-0101	Social Science (Research) Analyst or Social Scientist 
SST	GS-0102	Social Science Technician
HIS	GS-0107	Health Insurance Specialist
ECO	GS-0110	Economist
ECA	GS-0119	Economist Assistant/Technician
IRS	GS-0132	Intelligence Research/Operations
MDS	GS-0142	Manpower Developer
GEG	GS-0150	Geographer
CRA	GS-0160	Civil Rights Analyst
HST	GS-0170	Historian
PSY	GS-0180	Psychologist
PYT	GS-0181	Psychologist Technician
SOC	GS-0184	Sociologist
SWA	GS-0185	Social Worker
SSN	GS-0186	Social Services Assistant/Technician
SWT	GS-0187	Social Work Assistant/Technician
RCS	GS-0188	Recreation Specialist
RCT	GS-0189	Recreation Assistant/Technician
ANT	GS-0190	Anthropologist
HRG	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Generalist)
HRR	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Recruitment)
HRC	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Classification)
HRP	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Compensation)
HRL	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Labor Relations)
HRE	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Employee Relations)
HEL	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Employee and Labor Relations)
HRB	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Benefits)
HRI	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Information Systems)
HRD	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Development)
HRM	GS-0201	Human Resources Specialist (Military)
HRT	GS-0203	Human Resources Assistant or Technician
EEO	GS-0260	Equal Employment Opportunity Specialist
MSG	GS-0302	Messenger