
Rating of Record.  The performance rating prepared at the end of an appraisal period for the performance of assigned duties over the entire period, and the assignment of a summary level rating (5 CFR §§351.203 and 430.203).
Reemployment Priority List (RPL) as defined in 5 CFR Part 330 Subpart B and HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs, the mechanism used to give reemployment consideration and placement assistance to current and former HHS competitive service employees who have or will be separated by RIF, or have fully recovered from a compensable injury after one (1) year.
Representative Rate.  The fourth step of the grade for GS positions and the second step of the grade for WG/WL/WS positions. This is further defined under 5 CFR §351.203.
Reorganization.  The planned elimination, addition, or redistribution of functions or duties in an organization (5 CFR §351.203).
Retention Factors.  Tenure, veteran preference, performance ratings, and length of service. (5 CFR §§351.501 and 502).
Retention Register.  The ranking of employees in a competitive level after the following four (4) retention factors are applied: tenure of employment (i.e., type of appointment); veteran preference; performance ratings; and total creditable federal civilian and uniformed service (5 CFR §351.404).
Retention Standing.  The order that employees appear on a retention register based on their tenure of employment, veteran preference, performance ratings; and total creditable federal civilian and uniformed service, in descending (i.e., highest to lowest) order (5 CFR Part 351, Subpart E).
RIF Appeal.  An employee who believes her/his assignment rights were violated, or that the RIF process outlined in 5 CFR Part 351 was not correctly followed, may file a formal complaint with the Merit Systems Protection Board (5 CFR §351.901).
Tenure and Tenure Groups.  An employee's status based on length of service and type of appointment.  Tenure groups are defined under 5 CFR §§351.501(b) and 502(b).
Trainee Status.  When establishing competitive levels, employees in formally designated trainee or development programs that have all the characteristics listed in 5 CFR §351.703(e), e.g., Pathways Programs, SES Candidate Development Program, Emerging Leaders Program, are placed in a separate competitive level than employees not in trainee or development programs.
Transfer of Function.  The transfer of a function from one competitive area to one or more other competitive areas that does/do not perform the function at the time of transfer; or the movement of the competitive area in which the function is performed to another commuting area (5 CFR §351.203, and further explained in Subpart C).
Undue Disruption.  A degree of interruption that would prevent the completion of required work by the employee 90 days (while taking into consideration allowable limits of time, quality, and other demands) after the employee has been placed in a different position under this Instruction. The 90 day standard should be considered within the allowable limits of time and quality, taking into account the pressures of priorities, deadlines, and other demands.  However, a work program would generally not be unduly interrupted even if an employee needed more than 90 days after the RIF to perform the optimal quality or quantity of work.  The 90-day standard may be extended if placement is made in first or second-round RIF competition to a low-priority program, or to a vacant position (5 CFR §351.203).