
Workforce Planning. Before filling positions, HR Centers should identify the skill sets needed to perform the work in their Division and conduct workforce planning to ensure adequate resources are committed to provide the training and developmental requirements, and an adequate number of permanent positions will be available to convert participants who successfully complete the program requirements. See also Recruitment and Outreach in the general information section of the OPM Pathways Handbook. - PDF
Program Names. OpDivs/StaffDivs may rename their Pathways Programs in accordance with 5 CFR §362.101(b) and HHS' Pathways MOU.
Personnel Actions. When processing appointment personnel actions, OPM's Guide to Processing Personnel Actions, Chapter 11, Excepted Service Appointments, is used. The specific Schedule D authority that authorizes the appointment (5 CFR §213.3402(a), (b), or (c)) must be cited.
Tenure.
Interns serving under an appointment for an initial period expected to last more than one (1) year; Recent Graduates; and PMFs are in excepted service Tenure Group II.
A temporary Intern serving under an appointment NTE one (1) year, who has not completed one (1) year of service, is in excepted service Tenure Group 0.
A temporary Intern serving under an appointment NTE one (1) year, who has completed one (1) year of current continuous service, is in excepted service Tenure Group III.
Documentation. All documentation (e.g., personnel actions, participant agreement, performance plan, IDP, proof of mentorship, training) must be maintained in the participant's eOPF, in accordance with OPM's Guide to Personnel Recordkeeping (5 CFR §293.304; 5 CFR §250.101). OpDivs/StaffDivs must be able to show proof these program requirements were met within the required timeframes.
Citizenship (5 CFR §362.105(e), Consolidated Appropriations Act, and Executive Order 11935).
The Consolidated Appropriations Act (i.e., the annual federal budget) contains a government-wide ban on compensating individuals who are not U.S. citizens or nationals for any federal position within the U.S., unless the agency has a statutory exemption to the ban. An OpDiv/StaffDiv may appoint a non-citizen to a Pathways position if the participant is lawfully admitted to the United States as a permanent resident or is otherwise authorized to be employed; and the OpDiv/StaffDiv is authorized to pay non-citizens under their annual appropriations. HR Centers must consult their legal counsel to identify and comply with their annual OpDiv/StaffDiv-specific appropriations restrictions and exclusions prior to hiring an individual who is not a U.S. citizen for a Pathways position.
A Pathways participant must be a United States citizen to be eligible for noncompetitive conversion to the competitive service.
Employment of Relatives (5 CFR §362.105(f)).
A participant may work in an office where a relative (as defined in 5 U.S.C. §3110(a)(3)) is also employed, when there is no direct reporting relationship, and the relative is not in a position to influence or control the participant's appointment, employment, promotion or advancement. If circumstances arise that result in a direct supervisory relationship between relatives, one of the relatives must be reassigned to another position.
Managers, supervisors, and others in positions to influence personnel actions cannot appoint, employ, promote, or advance a relative to any position within HHS or advocate any such action.
Classification (OPM Pathways Handbook).
Pathways participants whose positions fall under the General Schedule (GS) or a comparable pay system must be classified in the xx99 series of the occupational group of the position being filled.
Pathways participants whose positions fall under the Federal Wage System (FWS) must be classified in the xx01 series of the occupational group of the position being filled.
Recruitment.
