
Certificates and Order of Consideration. Qualified candidates are placed on a certificate in the following order (5 CFR §211.102(d)(3); 5 CFR §302.303(d);  5 CFR §302.304 ):
Priority reemployment candidates. Qualified candidates on HHS's PRL must be given selection priority before other candidates can be referred, in accordance with 5 CFR §302.304 (a).
Qualified PRL candidates are placed on a priority reemployment certificate in the same order as other candidates described in d. ii. below.
The selection and pass over/objection procedures described below are followed.
HR Centers may appoint a candidate who is not a PRL eligible, or a PRL eligible who has a lower standing on the PRL list, when the PRL eligible(s) qualifications will create an undue interruption to the position. The HR Center must notify each PRL eligible of the reasons for non-selection and must also notify any preference eligible(s) on the PRL list of their right to appeal to the MSPB (5 CFR §302.304(a)). This documentation must be maintained in the recruitment case file.
Once an HR Center fulfills these requirements, other candidates may be considered for the position.
Other candidates are then placed on a regular certificate in the following order:
Qualified preference eligibles who have a compensable, service-connected disability of 10% or more, unless the list will be used to fill professional positions at GS-9 or above;
All other qualified candidates eligible for 10-point veteran preference;
All qualified candidates eligible for 5-point veteran preference;
All qualified candidates eligible for sole survivorship; then
Qualified candidates not eligible for veteran preference.
For Professional and Scientific Positions at the GS-9 grade level and above: All preference eligibles are considered together regardless of the type of preference, followed by other candidates.
Selection. Selections for all candidates are made from the highest preference category, as long as at least three candidates are in that group. When fewer than three (3) candidates are in the highest preference category, consideration may be expanded to include the next highest preference category (5 CFR §302.401(a) ). The Indian Health Service must give selection priority in accordance with 25 U.S.C. §5117, prior to applying the veterans' preference provisions in 5 CFR Part 302.
Pass Overs and Objections of Preference Eligibles (5 CFR §302.401(b) and OPM Delegated Examining Operations Handbook).
OpDiv/StaffDiv HRDs may approve or deny pass over requests of less than 30% compensable disabled veterans for excepted service positions and document reason(s) for selecting a non-preference eligible. This approval may not be redelegated below the OpDiv/StaffDiv HRD level.
The following pass over and objection requests require OPM approval before making selection(s):
A pass over of any preference eligible with a 30% or more compensable service connected disability (5 U.S.C §3318); 
A pass over of a preference eligible based on medical qualifications (5 CFR Part 339 ); and
Objections based on suitability determinations involving material, intentional false statement, deception or fraud in examination or appointment, or refusal to furnish testimony as required by 5 CFR §731.10 3(a).
Pass over requests requiring OPM approval must be sent to the ASA/OHR at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for review and concurrence. OHR will send the request to OPM if it concurs with the request. HR Centers must submit the following documentation to ASA/OHR:
Completed SF-62, Agency Request to Passover a Preference Eligible or Object to an Eligible, www.opm.gov/Forms/pdf_fill/SF62.pdf; - PDF
Resume/Application package to include title, series, and grade;
Copy of Position Description;
Copy of Vacancy Announcement;
Certificate of Eligibles; and
A memorandum approved by the HRD with a description of the reason sufficient to sustain an objection/pass over.
No correspondence is sent to a 30% or more compensable disabled applicant until ASA/OHR concurrence is received. Only after OPM has approved the pass over of the preference eligible may the 30% or more compensable disabled veteran be passed over and another applicant selected.
OpDivs/StaffDivs should be mindful of 5 U.S.C. §3320  and 5 CFR §332.406  when considering reasons for passing over a preference eligible, and consult with their legal counsel, if necessary, on whether the justification is likely to meet the standard of making selections in the same manner and under the same conditions required for the competitive service, as specified by 5 U.S.C. §3320. 
Compensation.
Setting Pay on Initial Appointment. OpDivs/StaffDivs adhere to 5 CFR §362.105(j); 5 CFR Parts 531 and 532; and applicable HHS pay policy when setting pay and using pay flexibilities for Pathways participants. See Overview under each Program of this Instruction for authorized grade levels.
Within-Grade Increases (5 CFR 531, Subpart D, and 5 CFR 532.417).
Participants who are either on a temporary appointment or on an appointment limited to one (1) year or less are not eligible for Within-Grade Increases (WGIs).
All other participants are entitled to WGIs and are advanced to the next higher rate of their grade at the beginning of the first applicable pay period following completion of the required waiting period, if their performance is satisfactory and they have not received an equivalent increase in pay during their waiting period.
Promotion. Consistent with HHS Instruction, 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service, the following requirements must be met for promotions:
The Intern meets the qualification requirements outlined in the OPM's Group Coverage Qualification Standard for Schedule D, Pathways Internship Positions for the next higher grade level and series of the position; or
The Recent Graduate or PMF meets the qualification requirements outlined in the OPM Qualification Standards for the next higher grade level and series for the position;
The participant's current performance rating of record while in the Program demonstrates satisfactory performance of at least 'Achieved Expected Results' or its equivalent, in accordance with HHS' Performance Management Appraisal Program. Participants are eligible for promotion after the minimum assessment or rating period specified in HHS Instruction 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program; and
The proposed grade/full performance level is established in the position description and was included in the JOA (see General Program Requirements, Recruitment, JOA Information in this policy).
Interns NTE are not eligible for promotion.
PMF promotions are permitted up to the GS-13 grade level while in the PMF program if the GS-13 full performance level (FPL) is established in the position description and was included in the OpDiv/StaffDiv PMF JOA in TMS. Promotions above the GS-13 grade level can only occur upon or after the date of conversion to a position in the competitive service following successful completion of the Program (HHS' Pathways MOU).
All Pathways Promotions: Time-in-grade restrictions outlined in 5 CFR 300, Subpart F, apply to movement to or within the competitive service; therefore, promotions within the excepted service are not subject to time-in-grade; however, promotions upon (or after) non-competitive conversion to the competitive service are subject to time-in-grade restrictions.
Federal Student Loan Repayment Assistance. OpDivs/StaffDivs may offer student loan repayment assistance as an incentive to recruit/retain highly skilled individuals, and to fill mission- critical and hard-to-fill positions. In offering this incentive, factors such as the value of the incentive to the OpDiv/StaffDiv and pay parity should be considered.