362-1: Pathways Programs
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 362-1, Pathways Programs, dated 08/19/2021

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 362, Presidential Management Fellows Program, 12/29/2005

HHS Instruction 362, Presidential Management Fellows Program, 6/30/2012

HHS Instruction 362-1, Pathways Programs, 01/04/2016

Background:
In accordance with 5 Code of Federal Regulation (CFR) Parts 302 and 362, this policy outlines the requirements of the Pathways Programs, consisting of the Intern, Recent Graduate, and Presidential Management Fellows ( PMF) programs.

The Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between HHS and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) authorizes HHS to utilize the Pathways Programs.

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out by HHS Operating and Staff Division HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Department policy.

/s/

Michael V. Culpepper
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources and Chief Human Capital Officer, Acting

362-1-00 Sections
362-1-10 Purpose
362-1-20 Background
362-1-30 Coverage and Exclusions
362-1-40 References
362-1-50 Definitions
362-1-60 Responsibilities
362-1-70 General Program Requirements
362-1-80 Developmental Program Requirements
362-1-90 Internship Program
362-1-100 Recent Graduates Program
362-1-110 Presidential Management Fellows Program
362-1-120 Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability

362-1-10  Purpose
This Instruction establishes policy for HHS Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions (OpDiv/StaffDiv, or Division) on the administration and management of the Pathways Programs, specifically:
Delegates OpDivs/StaffDivs Human Resources Centers (HR Centers) to make Pathways Programs appointments at the General Schedule (GS) 1-13 grade levels (or equivalent, including Federal Wage System), in accordance with HHS' Pathways MOU.
Establishes HHS' procedural guidance on the recruitment, assessment, selection, appointment, and promotion of individuals appointed under the Excepted Service, Schedule D, Pathways Programs.
Describes the developmental Pathways Programs requirements (i.e., orientation, participant agreement, individual development plan, mentorship, and training).
Defines the requirements for non-competitive conversion to the competitive service upon successful completion of the Pathways Program requirements.
Outlines workforce planning and OPM reporting requirements for actual and projected OpDiv/StaffDiv usage of the Pathways Programs.
This policy should be used in conjunction with HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service, which covers Pathways Programs positions.
When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.
362-1-20  Background
The Pathways Programs were established via Executive Order (E.O.) 13562, Recruiting and Hiring Students and Recent Graduates, dated December 10, 2010. The Programs replaced the former Student Temporary Employment Program (STEP) and the Student Career Experience Program (SCEP) with the Intern and Recent Graduate Programs and enhanced the Presidential Management Fellows (PMF) Program. The E.O. also abolished the Federal Career Intern Program (FCIP).

OPM maintains executive oversight of the Pathways Programs and central management of the PMF Program, in accordance with 5 CFR Part 362.

362-1-30  Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage. This policy applies HHS-wide and covers all Pathways Programs' Intern, Recent Graduate, and PMF appointments under Schedule D, 5 CFR ยง213.3402(a), (b), and (c).
Exclusions.
Intern and Fellowships under Schedule A, 5 CFR ยง213.3102(r). These programs are sponsored either by the OpDiv/StaffDiv or in conjunction with a third-party organization. Contact employmentpolicy@hhs.gov for program parameters required by OPM.
Student volunteer service authorized under 5 CFR Part 308.
The provisions of this policy pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees (e.g., the filling of a position within the scope of the bargaining unit, promotion and reassignments, and adverse actions) are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71. When the provisions of this policy differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the agreement takes precedence for covered bargaining unit employees.
