
Job Opportunity Announcement (JOA).
Interns and Recent Graduates. HR Centers must post a JOA or advertisement in USAJOBS when accepting applications outside their Division for the Intern or Recent Graduate Programs (5 CFR §§362.105(b); 362.203(a); 362.303(a) and HHS' Pathways MOU), and at least minimum public notice (i.e., within the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv) when accepting applications inside their Division.
PMFs. HR Centers must post PMF positions in OPM's Talent Management System (TMS), in accordance with Section 362-1-110 of this policy.
Accepting Applications (HHS' Pathways MOU). All HHS Pathways Programs candidates must apply to an open Pathways Programs JOA in order to receive consideration. Notice of recruitment events must include instructions on how to apply through USAJOBS or the OpDiv/StaffDiv website. Unsolicited applications, or applicants who express an interest for a specific vacancy, are provided instructions on how to apply to the JOA through USAJOBS, TMS, or the OpDiv/StaffDiv website. All Division websites that provide information on vacancies or recruitment events will include a link to the JOA on USAJOBS.
JOA Open Period.
OpDivs/StaffDivs have the discretion to determine the length of time a JOA is open; however, justifications for announcements open less than five (5) calendar days must be included in the recruitment case file. Justifications are based on the number, type(s), grade levels, and geographic locations of the positions being filled; labor market conditions; and recent experience filling similar positions.
OpDivs/StaffDivs may use the following options to manage application volume for positions that attract a high number of applicants:
Limiting the Number of Days a JOA is Open. Divisions should give consideration to the types, grade levels, and geographic locations of the positions being filled; and ensure the time allowed provides for fair and open competition that ensures potential applicants have reasonable opportunity to apply consistent with the merit system principles.
Limiting the Number of Applications Received. OpDivs/StaffDivs have the discretion to set "cut-offs" or limits (e.g., the first 100 applications received) on the number of applications that they will consider when filling a position. When using such limits, HR Centers accept any application received up until 11:59 PM Eastern Time on the day the limit is reached in order to accommodate applicants in non-Eastern time zones.
Using specific eligibility requirements for the Internship Program. OpDivs/StaffDivs may use requirements such as the ability to work a specified number of hours per week or be in good academic standing (i.e., maintenance of a minimum grade point average) as eligibility criteria. In addition, Intern applicants may be required to confirm their ability to work in the specific location(s) listed in the JOA. OpDivs/StaffDivs may not require the completion of educational requirements for specific coursework for occupations that do not have a positive education requirement.
When one or more of these options are used, they must be stated in the JOA, advertisement, or notice and a justification included in the case file.
If extended open periods are used (over 30 days), HR Centers must specify specific cut-off dates during the open period or specify limits on the numbers of applications during the open period.
JOA Information. The information listed in the OPM Pathways Handbook must be included in each Pathways Programs JOA, including:
All HHS Pathways JOAs must include the promotion potential (Full Performance Level or FPL) while in program and upon conversion in order to promote the participant without further competition while in program and upon conversion. Recommended FPL Language: 'Employees selected for this position are eligible for promotion up to the GS-xx grade level while in the Pathways Program and up to the GS-xx grade level after successful completion of the Program.'
JOAs can mention desired academic disciplines, but JOAs cannot require specific academic disciplines for positions that do not have a positive education requirement.
HR Centers may require the ability to work a specified number of hours per week as eligibility criteria or be in good academic standing when filling positions as long as such criteria is included in JOAs and participant agreements; applied uniformly; and stated in the OpDiv/StaffDiv's internal hiring procedures (HHS' Pathways MOU).
OpDivs/StaffDivs may accept applications from individuals who will meet eligibility requirements by an event listed in the JOA (e.g., JOA closing date, certificate issuance date, the date of appointment, etc.). If the JOA does not specify a date or event for meeting eligibility requirements, candidates are required to meet eligibility requirements by the date the certificate is issued. Such eligibility criteria are applied uniformly and described in the HR Center's internal Pathways hiring procedures (HHS' Pathways MOU).
Priority Placement Programs (PPP).
The HHS Priority Reemployment List (PRL) is required to be cleared when filling Pathways positions (5 CFR §362.105(c)(2)). The PRL is located on HR Exchange and provides selection priority to former HHS excepted service employees who have been furloughed or separated by RIF or compensable injury, or who appealed an adverse action to the Merit Systems Protection Board and was found to have been unjustifiably dismissed from the agency, but is not entitled to immediate restoration under the MSPB's decision, and registers for HHS' PRL. When recruiting, HR Centers must first clear the HHS PRL by considering all qualified candidates on HHS' PRL who are registered for the commuting area and the specific Schedule D authority of the Pathways position to be filled before referring the names of other qualified candidates. HR Centers follow the assessment procedures in this policy, and are required to retain sufficient documentation to demonstrate PRL clearance for each Pathways vacancy.
The Career Transition Assistance Program (CTAP), Interagency Career Transition Assistance Program (ICTAP), and Reemployment Priority List (RPL) do not apply when filling Pathways positions or to conversions of Pathways employees to the competitive service (5 CFR §330.609(i); 5 CFR §330.707(g); and 5 CFR §362.107(d)).
Assessment and Selection (5 CFR Parts 211, 302, and 5 CFR §362.105(c)(2)). For additional information, see HHS Instruction, 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service.
Assessment. OpDivs/StaffDivs assess all candidates for Pathways Programs positions using an unranked assessment method, as described in c.-f. below. OpDivs/StaffDivs may use an alternate method for filling Pathways positions within their Division (i.e., numerical ratings or category rating-like procedures) after they submit their Pathways hiring procedures to OHR for approval to ensure conformity with the requirements in 5 CFR Part 302 and HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service. All assessment procedures are applied uniformly and provided to applicants, along with notice of rating, upon an applicant's request (5 CFR 302.302).
ACWA Testing (Federal Register Vol. 77, No. 92, May 11, 2012). Administrative Careers with America (ACWA) testing is not required when filling GS-5 or 7 grade level Pathways positions. OpDivs/StaffDivs have the option to use the OPM ACWA assessment or utilize the unranked assessment method described in this policy when assessing applicants for GS- 5/7 positions formerly covered under ACWA.
Veterans' preference is granted as follows (5 CFR §302.201 ):
'CP' for preference eligibles that have a compensable, service-connected disability of 10% or more;
'XP' for all other preference eligibles eligible for 10-point veteran preference; and
'TP' for all preference eligibles eligible for 5-point veteran preference.