
Benefits. Individuals hired for a period expected to last longer than one (1) year are eligible for health and life insurance coverage, so long as they are also expected to be in a pay status for at least one-third of the total period of time from the date of their initial appointment to the date of completion in their respective Program. Participants on a temporary appointment, a seasonal schedule of less than six (6) months per year, or an intermittent schedule who are expected to work 130 hours per month or more for at least 90 days, are eligible for health insurance coverage. For additional guidance, see the OPM Pathways Handbook and/or consult servicing HR Center benefits specialists.
Performance. See Developmental Program Requirements and Separations/Terminations under each Program in this Instruction.
Awards. Pathways Program participants are eligible to receive awards, including performance awards, on-the-spot, special act, and time-off awards consistent with HHS Instruction, 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program.
Trial Periods. Trial periods provide an opportunity for supervisors to evaluate employee performance before finalizing appointments (i.e., conversion to the competitive service) or termination. Supervisors set expectations for Pathways participants performance, provide feedback, and evaluate an employee's performance and conduct to determine whether a participant's continued employment is in the best interest of the Department.
In accordance with 5 CFR Part 362 and OPM Pathways Handbook:
Intern. The length of a trial period for an HHS Intern is two (2) years, in accordance with HHS Instruction 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods. Note: The Intern may gain employee status for the purposes of appeal rights during the Internship appointment.
Recent Graduates. The duration of a Recent Graduate participants' appointment in the excepted service is a trial period (5 CFR §362.303(f)).
PMFs. The duration of a PMF participants' appointment in the excepted service is a trial period (5 CFR §362.404(d)).
All Pathways participants serve an initial one (1) year probationary period upon conversion to the competitive service (5 CFR §§315.713 and 801(e)). Some prior service may be creditable.
HHS Instruction 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods, should be consulted for additional information on probationary and trial periods including creditable time; calculating service; actions taken for failure to complete a trial or probationary period; and grievances and appeal rights.
See also Separations/Terminations under each Program in this policy.
Reassignments (OPM Pathways Programs Handbook and HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service). When reassigning participants to another Pathways position within the same Pathways Program, participants must meet the qualification requirements for the position (series and grade). Reassignments between programs are not permitted. If the participant is an Intern NTE, OpDivs/StaffDivs must provide minimum public notification (internal to the OpDiv/StaffDiv, not on USAJOBS) so that similarly situated Pathways participants within the OpDiv/StaffDiv who are also interested in the position can apply. If more than one individual applies to the position, then the assessment and selection procedures outlined in this policy apply. (See definition for reassignment in OPM's Guide to Processing Personnel Actions, Chapter 14.)
Program Extensions for Recent Graduates and PMFs (5 CFR §§362.303(c), 404(b), and HHS' Pathways MOU). Extensions may be approved by the OpDiv/StaffDiv HRD for up to 120 days for rare or unusual circumstances or situations (e.g., extended leave due to illness, significant life- altering event, military obligations, etc.) that prevent the participant from completing the program. Requests for extensions may be submitted by the Recent Graduate or PMF or the participant's supervisor to their servicing HR Center, and subsequently reviewed and recommended by the HRD. This authority may not be redelegated.
Conversions (5 CFR §362.107).
Subject to any caps imposed by OPM on HHS conversions, OpDivs/StaffDivs may non- competitively convert any Pathways participant who has met program requirements to a term or permanent position in the competitive service provided that this option was clearly stated in the Pathways JOA. A Pathways participant who is non-competitively converted to a term appointment in the competitive service may be subsequently converted to a permanent position in the competitive service at any time before the term appointment expires.
Time spent as a Pathways participant counts towards career tenure when the participant is noncompetitively converted without a break in service of one day to a permanent position in the competitive service upon completion of the program, with or without an intervening term appointment.
HHS Priority Placement Programs (CTAP, ICTAP, RPL or PRL) do not apply to conversions of Pathways participants to the competitive service.
See Conversions under each Program in this policy for specific program requirements.
362-1-80  Developmental Program Requirements
This section covers the development requirements of all Pathways Programs, except where otherwise specified:
