
Assignments must be clearly outlined in either an inter or intra agency financial agreement between OpDivs/StaffDivs or HHS and the hosting agency, in accordance with the reimbursable and non-reimbursable agreement requirements outlined in HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and IPA and HHS Financial Management Directive, Chapter 2 Interagency Agreement.
All assignments outside HHS, or that include OCONUS travel, must be submitted to the HHS PPO at pathways@ hhs.gov for review, coordination, and approval at least 30 calendar days prior to the proposed assignment and include a justification for the assignment and proof of 4. a. and b. above.
Performance assessments are required for assignments scheduled to last more than 90 calendar days. Hosting supervisors are responsible for assessing the PMF's performance at the conclusion of the assignment, and the performance assessment will be used by the PMF's HHS supervisor when completing the PMF's annual performance evaluation.
An extension and/or termination of an assignment must be mutually agreed upon by the PMF, his/her HHS supervisor, and the host agency. A 15 calendar day written notice is required.
PMFs immediately return to their employing office upon completion of the assignment.
Program Extensions. See General Program Requirements in this policy.
Certification (5 CFR §362.405 and HHS' Pathways MOU).
HRDs evaluate each PMF within their Division, and determine whether to certify in writing that the PMF met all program requirements, including performance and developmental requirements outlined in the PMF's performance plan and IDP. The HRD may consult the employee's supervisor and/or mentor to make their decision.
HRDs must certify NLT 30 calendar days prior to the expiration of the PMF's appointment and notify the PMF of his/her decision. This authority may not be redelegated.
Certifications must be forwarded annually upon request of the HHS PPO to pathways@hhs.gov.
If an HRD does not certify a PMF, the PMF may request for OPM to reconsider. The request must be in writing within 15 calendar days of the HRD's decision. Approved requests are sent to the HHS PPO at pathways@hhs.gov for review and OPM approval. OPM's decision is not subject to appeal and the PMF may continue in the Program pending outcome of OPM's decision. OpDiv/StaffDivs are required to continue to provide the appropriate developmental activities during the waiting period.
Non-Competitive Conversion (5 CFR §362.409). PMFs are eligible for conversion, without a break in service, to a term or permanent position in the competitive service if the PMF meets the following requirements:
Is a U.S. citizen;
Completed all PMF program requirements within two (2) years of appointment (plus any approved extensions);
Received a rating of at least 'Achieved Expected Results' or its equivalent in accordance with HHS' Performance Management Appraisal Program;
Receives a favorable recommendation for conversion in writing from t h e ir first-level supervisor;
Is certified in writing by the servicing HRD that the PMF has met all requirements prior to conversion (HHS' MOU with OPM); and
Meets the OPM qualification requirements (series and grade) of the position which the participant will be converted.
For additional guidance, see Conversions under General Program Requirements in this policy.
Separations.
Withdrawal/Resignation (5 CFR §362.407). A PMF may withdraw from the program at any time.
Withdrawals are treated as resignations from Federal service; however, any obligations established upon admission and appointment, such as a recruitment incentive, still apply.
If the PMF previously held a permanent appointment in the competitive service in the OpDiv/StaffDiv immediately prior to entering the Program, and the withdrawal from the program is not related to misconduct, poor performance, or suitability, the PMF may be placed in a permanent competitive service position within the employing OpDiv/StaffDiv at the discretion of the servicing HRD (5 CFR §362.407(a)(2)).
The OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC must notify the HHS PPO at pathways@hhs.gov within seven (7) calendar days when a PMF withdraws from the PMF program, so the PPO can notify OPM via TMS.
Readmission (5 CFR §362.407(b)). If a PMF withdraws from the program for reasons that are not related to misconduct, poor performance, or suitability, the former PMF may petition their servicing OpDiv/StaffDiv in writing for readmission and reappointment to the PMF Program. Such a petition must be in writing and include appropriate justification. The HRD, in consultation with the OpDiv/StaffDiv leadership, may tentatively approve or deny the request for readmission. The HHS PPO is notified at pathways@hhs.gov within seven (7) calendar days of readmission approval, along with the PMF's proposed status in the Program upon readmission and reappointment. ASA/OHR will notify the OPM Director. OPM may overrule HHS' decision to readmit and reappoint the PMF, and the OPM Director's decision is not subject to appeal.
Termination (5 CFR §362.408 and OPM Pathways Handbook). As a condition of employment, the appointment expires:
At the end of the two (2) year appointment (plus any approved extensions) unless the PMF participant is selected for non-competitive conversion.
A PMF may also be terminated for reasons including misconduct, poor performance, suitability, or failure to follow the terms and conditions of the PMF's participant agreement.
An OpDiv/StaffDiv's Employee Relations staff must be consulted prior to initiating termination actions for reasons other than expiration of appointment to ensure compliance with applicable federal laws and regulations and HHS policy. Once a participant meets the legal definition of an employee, they have due process rights and are entitled to advance written notice, an opportunity to respond to a proposed adverse action, and appeal rights to the Merit Systems Protection Board. For additional information, see HHS Instruction, 315- 1, Probationary and Trial Periods, and HHS Instruction, 752, Discipline and Adverse Action.
The OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC must notify the HHS PPO at pathways@hhs.gov within seven (7) calendar days when a PMF is terminated from the PMF program, so the PPO can notify OPM via TMS.
362-1-120  Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability
Records associated with hiring actions must be retained in individual recruitment case files to allow for third-party reconstruction. Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule. Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed.
HHS is required to report to OPM annually on projected and actual Pathways Programs hires, in accordance with 5 CFR §362.109. OpDiv/StaffDiv PPCs will provide data for their serviced Division upon request by the HHS PPO.
ASA/OHR will conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this policy, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.