
Official Documentation. OpDiv/StaffDivs must request the appropriate documentation (e.g., official transcripts) to verify Interns are in school at least half-time and in good academic standing prior to appointment and periodically throughout the Intern appointment. Official documentation must be provided by the Intern every semester/quarter of an academic school year in order to ensure continued compliance with the eligibility requirements. OpDiv/StaffDiv PPCs must notify the HHS PPO at pathways@hhs.gov when an Intern no longer meets the definition of a student.
Qualification Requirements (5 CFR §362.203). Candidates for Intern positions are evaluated against OPM's Group Coverage Qualification Standard for Schedule D, Pathways Internship Positions, for the series and grade level of the position being filled. OpDiv/StaffDiv have the option of developing qualifications standards instead of using OPM's group standard in accordance with requirements outlined in HHS Instruction 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service.
Recruitment. See General Program Requirements, Recruitment in this policy.
Appointment. Intern appointments are made under appointment authority 5 CFR §213.3402(a) for the following timeframes (5 CFR §362.203(d)(3)):
Intern (Indefinite) appointments expected to last more than one (1) year. Interns are assigned meaningful work that supports both the OpDiv/StaffDiv's needs and the Intern's academic field of study or career goals. Interns on indefinite appointments should not be assigned simple administrative or clerical tasks as their primary duties.
Intern NTE (Temporary) appointments not to exceed one (1) year. Assignments are short-term projects; labor-intensive duties not requiring subject matter expertise; or summer jobs. Temporary Intern appointments may be extended in accordance with the provisions outlined in 5 CFR §213.104, as long as the Intern continues to meet the eligibility requirements described in this Section and receives a positive recommendation and/or performance evaluation to justify the extension from her/his supervisor.
Work Schedule (5 CFR §362.203(g) and OPM Pathways Handbook). An Intern can work on either a full or part-time basis. Interns cannot work on an intermittent basis. Supervisors are responsible for establishing work schedules with Interns in accordance with 5 CFR §610.121. There are no limitation on the number of hours an Intern can work per week (so long as applicable laws and regulations governing overtime and hours of work are adhered to); however, supervisors and Interns should agree on a work schedule that does not interfere with the Intern's academic schedule or performance, and allows for completion of both their academic and program requirements in a reasonable timeframe. The work schedule must be documented in the Participant Agreement.
Breaks in Program. See also Definitions in this policy. A break in program must meet the following criteria:
Breaks are permissible in certain circumstances (e.g., medical leave, financial hardship, military service, or other situations outside of the participant's control);
The Intern must initiate a written request for a break in program and submit request to his/her supervisor;
The HRD, in consultation with the Intern's supervisor, may use their discretion to either approve or deny a request for a break in program, as well as determine the length of the break; however, breaks may not exceed 120 consecutive days in a calendar year;
Interns must be in good academic standing, as defined by the school, generally at least a 2.0 Grade Point Average (GPA) for undergraduate programs (cumulative; no rounding); and a 3.0 GPA for advanced degree programs;
If the waiver is approved, and the Intern will neither be attending school or working, the employee will be placed on leave-without-pay (LWOP) for the duration of the break; and
OpDiv/StaffDiv PPCs must monitor breaks within their Division and request official documentation described in this Section prior to the Intern returning to duty/program.
Compensation. See General Program Requirements in this policy.
Intern Program Requirements. See Developmental Program Requirements in this policy.
Rotational Assignment(s). See under Developmental Program Requirements in this policy.


Program Extensions. See Appointment, Intern NTE in this Section.
Non-Competitive Conversion (5 CFR §362.204). All Interns are eligible for conversion to a term or permanent position in the competitive service if the Intern meets the following requirements:
Is a U.S. Citizen;
Completed at least 640 hours of work experience in the Intern Program while enrolled as a half- or full-time degree- or certificate-seeking student; or meets the requirements for a waiver described below in this section;
Successfully completed a course of academic study at a qualifying educational institution conferring a diploma, certificate, or degree within 120 days preceding the appointment;
The possibility of conversion was included in the JOA used to fill the Intern position;
Receives a favorable recommendation for conversion in writing from their first-level supervisor; and
Meets the OPM qualification requirements (series and grade) of the position which the participant will be converted.
Interns must be converted within 120 days following successful degree completion, or terminated. The 120 days cannot be extended or used to complete the academic or program requirements. OpDiv/StaffDiv PPCs must notify the HHS PPO at pathways@hhs.gov when these timeframes are not met.
Interns who separate from the Federal government before or during the 120-day period after they complete their academic requirements lose their eligibility for non-competitive conversion to a term or permanent position in the competitive service.
Interns may be converted within HHS or any other executive agency.
For additional guidance, see Conversions under General Program Requirements in this policy.
Requirements to Waive Work Hours (5 CFR §362.204(d) and HHS' Pathways MOU). OpDiv/StaffDiv HRDs may waive up to one-half (320 hours) of the 640-hour service requirement for:
An Intern who has completed at least 320 hours of career-related work experience in the Internship Program and demonstrates outstanding academic achievement and exceptional job performance:
Official documentation showing an overall GPA of 3.5 or better on a 4.0 scale; standing in the top 10% of the student's graduating class; and/or induction in a nationally recognized scholastic honor society; and
Official performance summary rating given by the student's Internship supervisor higher than 'Achieved Expected Results' or its equivalent in accordance with HHS' Performance Management Appraisal Program.
Comparable non-federal internship experience in a field or functional area related to the Intern's target position and acquired while the individual:
Worked in, but not for, a Federal agency, pursuant to a formal internship agreement, comparable to the Pathways Internship Program;
Worked in, but not for, a Federal agency, pursuant to a written contract with a third- party provider officially established to provide internship experience that is comparable to the Pathways Internship Program;
Honorable active duty military service, including the National Guard and Reserves, as defined under 5 U.S.C. 2101; or
Student volunteer service described under 5 CFR Part 308 and other Federal programs designed to give internship experience to students, if the experience is comparable to the experience gained in the Pathways Internship Program.
Termination (5 CFR §362.205). As a condition of employment, the appointment expires:
120 days after completion of the Intern's course of academic study at a qualifying educational institution conferring a diploma, certificate, or degree, unless the Intern is converted to a position in the competitive service as described above in this Section; or
Upon the expiration of the Intern NTE (temporary) appointment.
Interns may also be terminated during their Intern appointment for reasons including misconduct, poor performance, suitability, or failure to follow the terms and conditions in the participant agreement including:
The Intern no longer meets the definition of student. The OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC must notify the HHS PPO at pathways@hhs.gov;
The Intern does not provide official documentation of current enrollment; or
The Intern does not maintain good academic standing, as defined by the educational institution.
An OpDiv/StaffDiv's Employee Relations staff must be consulted prior to initiating termination actions for reasons other than expiration of appointment to ensure compliance with applicable federal laws and regulations and HHS policy. Once a participant meets the legal definition of an employee, they have due process rights and are entitled to advance written notice, an opportunity to respond to a proposed adverse action, and appeal rights to the Merit Systems Protection Board. For additional information, see HHS Instruction, 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods, and HHS Instruction, 752, Discipline and Adverse Action.
