
362-1-100  Recent Graduates Program
Overview. The HHS Recent Graduates Program is a one (1) year* development program that provides entry-level career opportunities for individuals who have recently graduated from qualifying educational institutions or programs. Recent Graduates may be appointed up to the GS-12 or equivalent grade level, depending on qualifications (see Qualification Requirements in this Section). Those who successfully complete the program requirements may be eligible for non-competitive conversion to a term or permanent position in the competitive service. *CDC's Public Health Association Program for Recent Graduates is a two (2) year development program starting at the GS-5 grade level (HHS' Pathways MOU).
Eligibility Requirements (5 CFR §362.302). The following individuals are eligible to apply:
Individuals who completed a qualifying associate's, bachelors, masters, professional, doctorate, vocational or technical degree, or certificate from a qualifying educational institution within the previous two (2) years; or
Veterans, who due to military service were unable to apply within two (2) years of completing a qualifying associate's, bachelors, masters, professional, doctorate, vocational or technical degree, or certificate from a qualifying educational institution, have a full two (2) years upon release or discharge from active duty to apply. However, a veteran's eligibility period may not extend beyond six (6) years from the date on which the veteran completed the academic requirements described above.
Individuals are eligible to apply to the HHS Recent Graduates Program up to nine (9) months prior to completing their academic requirements.
Qualification Requirements.
Candidates for Recent Graduate positions are evaluated against the OPM Qualification Standard for the position (series and grade) to be filled and are eligible for the following grade levels if the following qualifications are met:
GRADE LEVEL	RECENT GRADUATE QUALIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
Up to GS-9	Any position in which the candidate qualifies.
GS-11	Science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) positions, if the candidate possesses a Ph.D. or equivalent degree directly related to the STEM position being filled; OR

Scientific or professional positions, as defined in OPM's General Schedule Qualification Standards, that are research related, if the candidate possesses a Master's or equivalent graduate degree directly related to the position being filled.
GS-12	Scientific or professional positions, as defined in OPM's General Schedule Qualification Standards, that are research related, if the candidate possesses a Ph.D. or equivalent degree directly related to the position being filled.
Recent Graduates are placed in positions with progressively more responsible duties which provide career advancement (career ladder) opportunities and cannot be appointed at the full performance level of any position.
Recruitment. See Section 362-1-70 I., General Program Requirements, Recruitment.
Appointment. Recent Graduate appointments are made under appointment authority 5 CFR §213.3402(b) for a period of one (1) year (with the exception of CDC's two (2) year program).
Movement Between Agencies (5 CFR §362.304). Recent Graduates may apply to the Pathways Program in other Federal agencies prior to completing HHS' Recent Graduate program requirements. Similarly, Recent Graduates at other Federal agencies may apply to HHS' Recent Graduate positions prior to completion of program requirements at other agencies. Time served under the previous agency's program is credited towards the program requirements of the new agency provided there is no break in service, as defined in this policy.
Compensation. See General Program Requirements in this policy.
Recent Graduate Program Requirements. See Developmental Program Requirements in this policy.
Rotational Assignment(s). See under Developmental Program Requirements in this policy.
Program Extensions. See General Program Requirements in this policy.
Non-Competitive Conversion (5 CFR §362.305). Recent Graduates are eligible for conversion to a term or permanent position in the competitive service if the Recent Graduate meets the following requirements:
Is a U.S. Citizen;
Successfully completes at least one (1) year of continuous service and all program requirements;
Receives a rating of at least 'Achieved Expected Results' or its equivalent in accordance with HHS' Performance Management Appraisal Program;
Receives a favorable recommendation for conversion in writing from t h e ir first-level supervisor; and
Meets the OPM qualification requirements (series and grade) of the position which the participant will be converted.
The non-competitive conversion may be made effective on the date the service requirement is met, or at the end of an approved program extension, if applicable.
HHS Recent Graduates may only be converted within HHS; and HHS may not convert Recent Graduates from other Federal agencies.
For additional guidance, see Conversions under General Program Requirements in this policy.
Termination (5 CFR §362.306). As a condition of employment, the appointment expires:
At the end of the one (1) year appointment (plus any approved extensions), unless the Recent Graduate is converted to a position in the competitive service.
Recent Graduates may also be terminated during their Recent Graduate appointment for reasons including misconduct, poor performance, suitability, or failure to follow the terms and conditions of the participant agreement.