
Schedule D. The excepted service appointing authority established by Presidential Executive Order 13562 to appoint individuals to Pathways Programs positions.
Student (5 CFR §362.202). An individual who has been accepted for enrollment; or who is enrolled and seeking a degree (diploma, certificate, etc.) in a qualifying educational institution on a full or half-time basis (as defined by the educational institution in which the student is enrolled), including awardees of the Harry S. Truman Foundation Scholarship Program under Public Law 93- 842. Students do not need to be in actual physical attendance in school (i.e., virtual learning), as long as all other requirements are met. A student who needs to complete less than the equivalent of half an academic, vocational, or technical course-load immediately prior to graduating is still considered a student for purposes of the Internship Program.
362-1-60  Responsibilities
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding the Pathways Programs consistent with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Designates an HHS Pathways Program Officer (HHS PPO) at the General Schedule (GS) 12 or above within ASA/OHR to administer the HHS Pathways Programs; provide technical guidance on the programs and information on upcoming events/deadlines; and serve as HHS' liaison with OPM. The HHS PPO may also serve as the HHS Presidential Management Fellows coordinator, unless another OHR employee is identified.
Submits reports and data to OPM on HHS Pathways Programs, including workforce planning strategies, annual hiring data, PMF change in status, and any other information requested by OPM (5 CFR §§362.104 and 109).
Re-executes the Department's Pathways MOU agreement with OPM every two (2) years to continue HHS' use of the Pathways Programs hiring authority (5 CFR §362.104(a)).
Ensures HHS adheres to the 5 CFR Part 302 requirements for accepting applications, assessing applicants, rating and ranking qualified candidates, and granting veterans' preference as described in this policy.
Approves an OpDiv/StaffDiv's alternate Pathways Programs hiring procedures prior to use to ensure conformance with federal regulations and HHS policy.
Ensures HHS adheres to any appointment or conversion caps placed on the Pathways Programs by OPM (5 CFR §362.108(a)).
Periodically reviews OpDivs/StaffDivs' procedures, actions, and reports to assure conformance with the HHS Pathways MOU with OPM, applicable HHS policy, OPM guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Centers (HR Centers):
Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy and guidance, collective bargaining agreements, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Designate an OpDiv/StaffDiv Pathway Programs Coordinator to administer the day-to-day aspects of the programs for their serviced Division.
Ensure the development of OpDiv/StaffDiv Pathways Programs' recruitment and developmental procedures, consistent with this policy.
Ensure hiring procedures are applied uniformly, and positions are filled in accordance with the procedures in this policy.
Ensure Pathways participants' continuous eligibility for the Pathways Programs, in accordance with the requirements specified in this policy.
Evaluate the performance of each Pathways participant within their Division and the participant(s) completion of the program requirements for conversion to the competitive service or termination.
Human Resource Directors (HRDs) have the authority to:
Approve breaks in program for Interns and waive up to one-half (320 hours) of the 640- hour minimum service requirement consistent with the procedures in this policy;
Approve program extension requests for Recent Graduates and PMFs submitted by the participant or the participant's supervisor to their servicing HR Center; and
Certify in writing PMFs' completion of the program NLT 30 calendar days prior to the expiration of the PMF's appointment following the procedures in this policy.
This authority may not be redelegated (HHS' Pathways MOU).
Provide information on PMFs' change in status within seven (7) calendar days, and data on projected and actual Pathways Programs hires to the HHS Pathways Program Officer (PPO) annually.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Pathways Program Coordinators (OpDiv/StaffDiv PPCs):
Administer the HHS Pathways Programs within their serviced Division, consistent with HHS policy, OPM guidance, collective bargaining agreements, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Provide advisory services to their Division's Pathways participants and their supervisors on the Pathways Programs consistent with HHS policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.
Ensure their Division's compliance with the rules covering workforce planning and employment, including public notice, eligibility, appointment, assessment, selection, promotion, conversion and termination under the Pathways regulations.
Ensure their Division's compliance with delivering and documenting formal training and development, including Pathways Participant Agreements; performance plans and progress evaluations; Individual Development Plans (IDPs); mentors; and training.
Serve as the liaison with the HHS PPO including:
Providing hiring data to fulfill HHS' annual reporting requirements (5 CFR §362.109);
Notifying the HHS PPO on a PMF change in status within seven (7) calendar days including appointment, movement between agencies, withdrawal/resignation, termination, readmission, and conversion (5 CFR 362, Subpart D);
Notifying the HHS PPO when an Intern no longer meets the definition of a student (5 CFR §362.202); and
Notifying the HHS PPO of any participant who is not converted or terminated within required the timeframes (5 CFR §362.107(f)).
Attend the annual OPM PMF hiring fair as an HHS representative at HHS' exhibit/interview table(s); advise PMF finalists about HHS' job opportunities on the PMF Talent Management System; and provide/bring marketing materials for their respective Division.
Submit the PMF reimbursement fee to the OPM PMF Program Office no later than thirty (30) days of a PMF's acceptance on a tentative job offer within their respective Division.
Ensure the OpDiv/StaffDiv adheres to any appointment or conversion caps placed on the HHS Pathways Programs by OPM via the HHS PPO.
362-1-70  General Program Requirements
This section covers the general requirements of all Pathways Programs, except where otherwise specified:
