
Pathways Programs Orientation. OpDiv/StaffDivs provide Pathways participants with a new employee orientation session within 30 days of their appointment to advise participants of program requirements including benefits associated with their appointments, completion of required forms, performance expectations and evaluation, assignment of mentors, and training. All participants should be provided the name of the OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC for program questions. Time spent in orientation may count toward the annual required hours of formal interactive training.
Participant Agreement. All Pathways Program participants must sign an OpDiv/StaffDiv participant agreement prior to their entrance on duty date that, at a minimum, includes:
General description of duties;
Work schedule;
Length of appointment;
Training requirements;
Mentorship opportunities;
Evaluation of employee performance procedures;
Requirements for continuation of employment and successful program completion;
Minimum eligibility requirements for noncompetitive conversion to a term or permanent competitive service position (5 CFR §§362.106 and 107); and
For Interns, specify the end date of the appointment (5 CFR §362.203(d)(3)(i)).
Performance Plan. Performance plans are required for each participant whose appointment are expected to last 90 days or more and must be established within 30 calendar days of the participant's entrance on duty, in accordance with HHS Instruction 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program (PMAP). OpDivs/StaffDivs provide regular feedback, hold a mid- year performance review, and complete annual evaluations for participants consistent with HHS' PMAP.
Individual Development Plan (IDP). All participants whose appointments are expected to last more than 90 days must be placed on an IDP within 45 calendar days of the participant's entrance on duty. For PMFs: HR Centers must use the OPM PMF IDP template (OPM Form 1302 - PDF). IDPs are individually tailored to the following elements:
Target Position. A brief description of the target position; and the specific competencies or knowledge, skills, and abilities that will be required to qualify for the target position.
Learning Objective. Specific learning objectives, including the required developmental activities, as well as formal interactive training.
Details and Timelines. Describe when and how the learning objectives will be accomplished.
Demonstrated Success. Describe method used to track objectives and accomplishments.
Mentor. All participants whose appointments are expected to last more than 90 days must be assigned a mentor within 90 calendar days of their entrance on duty date. A PMF mentor must be a current managerial employee outside the PMF's chain of command, but within the HHS.
Training. This list is not all inclusive, additional training classes may be required/assigned.
Interns. There is no minimum number of training hours required for Interns; however, up to 40 hours of formal, interactive annual training must be accessible. The training may use a variety of flexible, cost-effective mediums, such as on-the-job, virtual, classroom, etc. (Intern NTEs hired to complete temporary projects are not required to be provided formal training.)
Recent Graduates. Recent Graduates must receive a minimum of 40 hours of formal, interactive training per year that advances the goals and competencies outlined in each participant's IDP.
Presidential Management Fellows. PMFs must receive a minimum of 80 hours of formal interactive training per year that addresses the competencies outlined in the PMF's IDP, and at least one (1) developmental assignment of four (4) to six (6) months in duration within the PMF's targeted occupation or discipline will be provided.
HHS Mandatory Training. Participants must complete all HHS mandatory training. Such training does not count toward the minimum hours of required training specified above.
Rotational Assignments. Participants (with the exception of Intern NTE per OPM Pathways Programs Handbook) may be assigned to rotational assignments (i.e., a detail) one (1) to six (6) months in duration within their employing OpDiv/StaffDiv, or anywhere within HHS. Rotations do not necessarily need to be in same occupation in which the participant will likely convert; however, must be for the purposes of providing the participant with valuable knowledge, skills, and experiences; to broaden their perspective of the OpDiv/StaffDiv and/or HHS mission; and to aid in their retention. A rotation may be used to give the participant knowledge, skills, or abilities in another area of the functional discipline of the participant's occupation, or in another OpDiv/StaffDiv with similar occupations, for example. See HHS Instruction 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments, for general requirements and required intra-agency financial agreements for reimbursable details.
Documentation. See General Program Requirements in this Instruction.
362-1-90  Internship Program
Overview. The Internship Program provides high school, vocational, technical, undergraduate, and graduate students, who are enrolled in or accepted for enrollment in a qualifying education institution, with paid opportunities to work either part- or full-time in agencies and explore career paths related to their academic fields of study or career interests. Interns must meet the definition of student throughout the duration of their appointment (5 CFR §362.203(b)) and can be appointed at any grade level for which they qualify. Interns who successfully complete the program requirements may be eligible for non-competitive conversion to a term or permanent position in the competitive service.
Eligibility Requirements (5 CFR §362.203(b)). HHS Interns must:
Be accepted or enrolled in a qualifying educational institution pursuing a degree, diploma, or certificate in a qualifying education institution;
Meet the definition of a student throughout the duration of their Intern appointment (except during an approved break in program);
Meet the qualification requirements (series and grade); satisfy suitability and security requirements; and if applicable, satisfy any physical/medical requirements; and
Meet additional requirements specified in the OpDiv/StaffDiv participant agreement with the Intern. See also Developmental Program Requirements, Participant Agreement.
