362-1-40  References
Executive Order (E.O.) §13562, Recruiting and Hiring Students and Recent Graduates
5 U.S.C. §2301, Merit System Principles 
5 U.S.C. §3110, Employment of Relatives, Restrictions 
5 U.S.C. §3320, Excepted Service; Government of District of Columbia; Selection 
Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 213, Excepted Service
5 CFR Part 302, Employment in the Excepted Service
5 CFR §315.713, Conversion Based on Service in a Pathways Program Under Part 362
5 CFR Part 362, Pathways Programs
OPM Pathways Programs Handbook, - PDF August 2016
OPM Vet Guide, Type of Appointment, Excepted Service Employment
OPM/HHS Pathways Programs Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), renewed biennially
HHS Instruction, 300-3, Details and IPA Assignments (for rotational assignments/details)
HHS Instruction, 302-1, Employment in the Excepted Service
HHS Instruction, 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods
HHS Instruction 330-2, Priority Placement Programs (CTAP, ICTAP, RPL, PRL)
HHS Instruction, 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program (non-SES)
HHS Instruction, 752, Discipline and Adverse Action
362-1-50  Definitions
Advanced Degree/Professional Degree. A professional or graduate degree from an accredited, academic institution (e.g., Master's, Doctor of Philosophy (PhD), Juris Doctorate (JD)). See U.S. Department of Education's Database of Accredited Postsecondary Institutions and Programs.
Break in Program. A period of time when an Intern is working but is unable to go to school; or is neither attending school nor working.
Break in Service. The time when an employee is no longer on the payroll and is separated for more than three (3) calendar days, see OPM Guide to Processing Personnel Actions, Glossary of Terms, - PDF unless otherwise noted in this policy.
Certificate Program. Post-secondary education in a qualifying educational institution, equivalent to at least one (1) academic year of full-time study that is part of an accredited college-level, technical, trade, vocational, or business school curriculum. See U.S. Department of Education's Database of Accredited Postsecondary Institutions and Programs.
Competitive Service. Pathways participants are eligible to be non-competitively converted to a term or permanent position in the competitive service after successful completion of the Program, or terminated (see Section 362-1-70, General Program Requirements, Conversions). The competitive service covers all civilian positions in the Federal government that are not specifically excepted from the civil service laws by or pursuant to statute, by the President or by OPM under Rule VI, and are not in the Senior Executive Service (SES) or Senior Level position (SL).
Excepted Service. All Pathways positions are in the excepted service which covers civilian positions in the executive branch of the Federal government that are specifically excepted from the competitive service rules by law or statute, by the President via Executive Order, or by OPM (i.e., Schedules A, B, C, or D), and are not in the SES.
Intern (5 CFR 362 Subpart B). A current high school, vocational, technical, undergraduate, or graduate student appointed while still in school to an initial appointment exceeding one (1) year in the Pathways Internship Program, to explore a federal career as paid employees while continuing their education.
Intern NTE (5 CFR 362 Subpart B). A current high school, vocational, technical, undergraduate, or graduate student appointed while still in school to a paid temporary appointment NTE one (1) year in the Pathways Internship Program, to complete temporary projects, to perform labor-intensive tasks not requiring subject-matter expertise, or to fill traditional summer jobs.
Participant Agreement (5 CFR §362.106). A required formal written agreement between the HHS supervisor and each Pathways participant that clearly identifies the participant's work duties, work schedule, length of appointment, applicable training requirements, mentorship opportunities, performance evaluation procedures, requirements for successful completion of program, and minimum eligibility requirements for conversion to the competitive service.
Pathways Programs Officer (PPO). An individual within Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources, who has overall responsibilities for administering the Pathways Programs HHS-wide. This individual serves as a liaison between HHS and OPM and may also serve as the HHS PMF Coordinator.
Pathways Program Participant. An individual appointed as an Intern, Recent Graduate, or Presidential Management Fellow under the HHS Pathways Program.
Presidential Management Fellow (PMF) (5 CFR 362, Subpart D). An individual appointed to a two (2) year leadership development program designed to attract individuals who demonstrate academic excellence, possess management and leadership potential, and have a clear interest in and commitment to public service. Individuals must apply to OPM's PMF Program's annual job opportunity announcement within two (2) years of receiving a qualifying advanced degree. Students who expect to complete an advanced degree by August 31 of the academic year in which OPM's competition is held may also apply.
Qualifying Educational Institution (5 CFR §362.102):
A public high school whose curriculum has been approved by a State or local governing body; a private school that provides secondary education as determined under State law; or a homeschool that is allowed to operate in a State; and
Any of the following educational institutions or curricula that have been accredited by an accrediting body recognized by the Secretary of the Department of Education: a technical or vocational school; a two or four-year college or university; a graduate or professional school (e.g., law school, medical school); or a post-secondary homeschool curriculum.
Recent Graduate (5 CFR 362, Subpart C). An individual who has obtained a qualifying Associate's, Bachelor's, Master's, Professional, Doctorate, vocational, or technical degree or certificate from a qualifying educational institution within the previous two (2) years of application (up to six (6) years for qualifying veterans) to obtain entry-level developmental experience designed to lead to a career in the Federal government.
