
An OpDiv/StaffDiv's Employee Relations staff must be consulted prior to initiating termination actions for reasons other than expiration of appointment to ensure compliance with applicable federal laws and regulations and HHS policy. Once a participant meets the legal definition of an employee, they have due process rights and are entitled to advance written notice, an opportunity to respond to a proposed adverse action, and appeal rights to the Merit Systems Protection Board. For additional information, see HHS Instruction, 315-1, Probationary and Trial Periods, and HHS Instruction, 752, Discipline and Adverse Action.
362-1-110  Presidential Management Fellows Program
Overview. The Presidential Management Fellows (PMF) Program is a professional leadership and development program centrally managed by OPM. The PMF program promotes careers in the Federal government by offering leadership development opportunities to graduates who have received advanced degrees within the past two (2) years, and is designed to attract individuals who demonstrate academic excellence, possess management and leadership potential, and have an interest in and commitment to public service. Individuals are appointed at the GS-9, GS-11, or GS- 12 grade level (or equivalent), and at the end of the two (2) year program, employees who meet all program requirements may be non-competitively converted to a term or permanent position in the competitive service (5 CFR 362 Subpart D).
OPM Recruitment, Assessment, and Selection as a PMF Finalist (5 CFR §362.403).
OPM manages the annual recruitment for the PMF program. Candidates apply to the PMF Program's annual JOA in USAJOBS. Interested applicants may apply if they:
Have received a qualifying advanced degree within two (2) years of the JOA, or
Expect to complete an advanced degree by August 31 of the academic year in which OPM's competition is held.
Candidates may apply more than once under the criteria described in 5 CFR §362.403(d).
OPM assesses PMF finalists for initial appointments at the GS-9 grade level (or equivalent) based on each candidate's experience and accomplishments via a structured assessment process.
Veterans' preference is applied by OPM and PMF finalists' preference status are annotated on the PMF finalist list.
OPM selects the finalists and publishes the PMF finalist list annually on the PMF website at https://www.pmf.gov/.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Recruitment, Assessment, and Selection of a PMF Finalist. After the list of PMF finalists is published by OPM, registered OpDivs/StaffDivs are responsible for recruiting, assessing, and selecting PMF finalists for positions within their respective Division:
OpDiv/StaffDiv PPCs advertise PMF job opportunities for their respective Division in the PMF Talent Management System (TMS) on OPM's website. (Each OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC will need an account established by the HHS PPO. Send requests to pathways@hhs.gov.) JOAs must contain sufficient information for finalists to determine their interest in applying to the position, including job title, duties, location(s), promotion potential, and the possibility of conversion to a term or permanent competitive service position.
Applications are accepted for PMF positions posted in TMS in accordance with Accepting Applications in this policy.
PMF job opportunities are open in accordance with the JOA Open Period in this policy.
OpDivs/StaffDivs use OPM's Qualification Standards for PMF positions that are filled above the GS-9 level or for positions that have Individual Occupational Requirements at the GS-9 level. (PMF finalists are pre-qualified at the GS-9 level, see B. 2. above.)
OpDivs/StaffDivs follow the assessment and selection procedures in this Instruction when filling PMF positions (5 CFR §362.105(c)(2) and the OPM Pathways Handbook).
OpDivs/StaffDivs must exhaust or pass over preference eligibles before considering non- preference eligibles for PMF positions. See pass over and objection procedures in this policy.
Appointment. PMF appointments are for two (2) years under appointment authority 5 CFR §213.3402(c).
Required Documentation. PMFs must provide official documentation to verify her or his graduate degree completion prior to initial appointment/entrance on duty.
Reimbursement Fee. The PMF reimbursement fee ($8,000 per PMF with PMF Class of 2022) must be submitted to OPM's PMF Program Office at pmffee@opm.gov no later than 30 days after the PMF accepts a tentative job offer. An Interagency Agreement Form (FS Form 7600A and B) found under the 'Agencies' section at www.pmf.gov must also be submitted. See www.pmf.gov for instructions on how to complete and submit this form.
Appointment Eligibility. PMFs are eligible for appointment for 12 months from the date OPM selects the individual as a PMF finalist. PMFs must enter on duty within this timeframe.
Entry Level Grade. Appointments may be made at the GS-9, GS-11, or GS-12 grade level (or equivalent), based on the PMF's qualifications.
Full Performance Level (FPL). OpDivs/StaffDivs determine the career ladder of PMF positions within their Division; however, the FPL may not exceed GS-13 grade level and must be established in the position description and included on the OpDiv/StaffDiv JOA posted on TMS, in accordance with the OPM Pathways Handbook and Merit System Principles.
The OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC must notify the HHS P P O at pathways@hhs.gov within seven (7) calendar days after appointment, so the PPO can notify OPM via TMS.
Movement between Agencies (5 CFR §362.406). PMFs may move to another Federal agency at any time during their PMF appointment under the following conditions:
The PMF must separate from the current agency and the new agency must appoint the participant without a break in service; and
Time served under the previous PMF appointment applies towards the completion of the program at the new employing agency.
If the move occurs within the first six (6) months of the PMF's appointment, the original appointing agency may request reimbursement of one-quarter of the PMF placement fee from the new appointing agency.
The OpDiv/StaffDiv PPC must notify the HHS P P O at pathways@hhs.gov within seven (7) calendar days when a PMF from another Federal agency is appointed to HHS, so the PPO can notify OPM via TMS.
Compensation. See General Program Requirements in this policy.
PMF Program Requirements.
Orientation. In addition to the internal orientation described under Developmental Program Requirements in this policy, OPM periodically offers PMF orientations via webinar throughout the year. These sessions last for approximately two (2) hours and address program requirements and individual questions. The hours spent in this training may count toward the required 80 hours of formal interactive training per year.
Developmental Assignment. PMFs are required to participate in one (1) developmental assignment (i.e., detail) four (4) to six (6) months in duration to build competencies in the occupation or functional discipline in which the PMF will most likely convert, with management and/or technical responsibilities consistent with the PMF's position description and IDP.
The assignment may be within HHS or in another Federal agency with an active signed Pathways Programs MOU with OPM. The assignment must be outside the PMF's direct chain of command.
As an alternative, a PMF may participate in a HHS-wide or Administration initiative that will provide the PMF with the experience s/he would have gained through the four (4) to six (6) months developmental assignment.
Rotational Assignment(s). See under Developmental Program Requirements in this policy.
Assignment Requests. Consistent with 5 CFR §362.405(b)(4-5):
Development and rotation assignments (i.e., details) are negotiated in advance with the PMF, his/her supervisor, host supervisor, and the servicing HR Center, and meet the following requirements:
PMFs have signed a participant agreement, and are placed on an IDP and performance plan before the assignment (see Developmental Program Requirements in this policy); and
The assignment has written supervisory approval, i.e., the supervisor certifies the assignment supports, and is directly linked to, the PMF's IDP; and any travel within or Outside the Continental United States (OCONUS) and its Territories supports the overall mission of the Division.