
Conversions: Conversions are only to be used in exceptional circumstances as outlined in this policy. In addition, the OPDIV must document the results of the peer review, demonstrating that the employee meets the required criteria outlined in 42-90 of this policy.
Positions Designated as 42 U.S.C. § 209(f): For positions not identified in Appendix 3, OPDIVs may request this designation for specific positions. This designation must be approved for each specific position, or group of positions, by the ASA. In order to be considered for 42 U.S.C. §209(f) designation, the OPDIV must submit the following documentation to the HHS OHR Title 42 Program Manager:
Historical data, including, but not limited to, current (not to exceed 5 years), local and national labor market analysis and workforce analysis, demonstrating that prior efforts to recruit and/or retain under other available personnel systems were attempted, but unsuccessful; and
Description of the position, including the credentials and experience necessary fo r an incumbent to possess to be successful in the position.
42-120 Benefits
While the laws and regulations outlined in 5 U.S.C. and 5 C.F.R. do not apply to employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f), the benefits available (e.g., life insurance, health insurance, retirement, etc.), as well as the criteria for eligibility are the same for both groups of employees. Specifically, employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) for more than 12 months (with the exception of non-citizens in overseas locations) will receive benefits equivalent to those of employees appointed under Title 5.
As noted above, although the laws and regulations outlined in 5 U.S.C and 5 C.F.R do not apply to employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f), these employees are covered by the same leave provisions as employees appointed under Title 5.
42-130 Awards
Employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) are eligible for the following categories of awards: performance-based cash awards, onetime special act awards (including on the spot and time off awards), and honorary awards.

42-140 Performance Management and Conduct
All Title 42 employees must be on a performance plan that meets all requirements of the appropriate Departmental performance system. Ratings under the performance plan will be used as the basis for pay decisions.
Title 42 employees must maintain acceptable performance and conduct m order to be retained in their positions.
42-150 Other Actions
If an employee voluntarily or involuntarily separates from a Title 42 position and seeks to return to a non-Title 42 position, the employee may be considered in accordance with all civil service or Commissioned Corps requirements. Pay of Title 42 employees, upon converting to a non-Title 42 position, will be set no higher than the maximum General Schedule pay limitations under Title 5 for civil servants and regular pay tables (including any applicable special or professional pay) for Commissioned Corps officers.
Prior to appointment or conversion to a Title 42 position, employees must be informed in writing that they are not entitled to Merit System Protection Board (MSPB) appeal rights under the Civil Service Reform Act (CSRA).
42-160 Conduct Laws and Regulations
Title 42 employees must comply with all ethical and conduct-related laws and regulations applicable to other Executive Branch employees. These include laws concerning financial interests, financial disclosure, and conduct regulations promulgated by the Department, by the Office of Government Ethics, and other agencies.

42-170 Processing Appointments and Conversions to 42 U.S.C. § 209(t)
Initial and Subsequent Appointments. Requests to appoint and/or convert individuals using 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) will be processed in accordance with the OPM Guide to Processing Personnel Actions.
Employees appointed or converted to a 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) pos1t1on must sign a statement documenting their understanding that they are accepting an excepted service appointment and to acknowledge that they are not entitled to MSPB appeal rights under the CSRA.
Appointment of Non-citizens: Non-citizens may be appointed as permitted by law. The non-citizen must have an appropriate work visa.
42-180 Program Review and Evaluation
The ASA, Office of Human Resources, will periodically review appointments made under the 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) authority and associated supporting documentation to ensure proper use.


Appendix 1: Required Documentation for Initial Appointments Under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f)
The following information must be documented and maintained for each individual initial appointment made under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f). The information must be maintained by the OPDIV and made available upon request from the HHS OHR.

Position Summary: Provide a summary of the position, including major duties/ responsibilities and required qualifications/experience.

Recruitment Efforts:

Provide a summary of recruitment efforts to fill this position through other available personnel systems. Provide detailed information regarding recruitment strategies (e.g., USAJOBS, professional journals, professional organizations, etc.); number of applicants; and probable reasons recruitment efforts were unsuccessful.
Provide a summary of recruitment efforts used to fill the position through Title 42, if different from those used for other personnel systems, please explain.
Candidate Qualifications and Experience: Provide a summary of the candidate's credentials, experience, and stature in the scientific community and explain how they are commensurate with, and directly related to the position being filled.

Appendix 2: Documentation Checklist for 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) Appointments
For All Appointments be sure to include:

Statement of Duties
CV
Documentation to support positive education requirements (e.g., official transcript)
Statement signed by employee acknowledging he/she understands that he/she is accepting an excepted service appointment and is not entitled to MSPB appeal rights under the CSRA
Appropriate employment visa (if applicable)
Salary justification
Any other documentation deemed necessary by the OPDIV
For Initial Appointments be sure to include:

Summary of Recruitment Efforts and Supporting Documentation for Title 5 or Other Available Personnel System
Summary of Recruitment Efforts and Supporting Documentation for 42 U.S.C. § 209(f)
Qualification and Experience Summary
For Conversion Actions be sure to include:

Peer Review Summary
Appendix 3: 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) Official Scientific Individual/ Categorical Designations
42 U.S.C. § 209(f) appointments may appropriately be made at the NIH, CDC, and FDA if in the designated official scientific individual/categorical position titles listed below.

NIH

Senior Investigator (excluding Clinical Senior Investigators) NIH Distinguished Investigator
NIH Clinical Track (HS)
Investigator
Staff Clinician
Senior Clinician Scientific Executive NIH Deputy Director
IC Director
IC Deputy Director Scientific Director
Investigator 2 (tenure-track scientists) Science Policy/Program Leaders, Tier 2
CDC

Centers/Institutes/Offices (CIO) Directors and Associate Directors CIO Deputies
Division Director level scientific positions
Associate Director for Science, Office of the Associate Director for Science
Principal Deputy Director, Center for Global Health, Division of Global Health HIV/AIDS
FDA

Deputy Commissioner
Chief Scientist
Associate Commissioner
Associate Director and Deputy Director
Center Director and Deputy Center Director
Office Director and Deputy Office Director
Senior Science Advisor