Experience
Candidates must have professional experience and stature in their area of expertise commensurate with the duties of the position being filled. At minimum, a candidate's experience must be equivalent to the minimum qualification standards prescribed for a position at the GS 13 level or higher.
In order to determine eligibility, supervisors must prepare a narrative statement fully describing the scientific duties and responsibilities of the position, the requisite educational background, and experience required to perform those duties. A classified position description is not required. However, the statement of duties must be reviewed to determine equivalent grade level.
Eligible Series
All Title 42 positions must be identifiable within a General Schedule occupational group. The title and series assigned to the position will be based on the duties of the position.
42-70 Compensation
Salaries for individuals appointed on a full-time schedule will be set on a per annum basis commensurate with the applicants' qualifications, experience, and other factors as described below. Appointments that are on other than a full-time basis will be paid on a pro-rata basis of an annualized salary.
For purposes of this program, the appointee's compensation is the base salary for pay, leave, and benefits, as well as retention allowances, recruitment/relocation bonuses, and awards, which are not included in base salary. Base salary will be set at the lowest rate necessary to recruit the candidate. In determining the base salary,  management must consider such factors as:
Current salary;
Competing offer of employment, either written or verbal;
Stature of individual in his/her professional field;
Average salary from a published salary survey;
Urgency of the program relative to mission accomplishment;
Role and impact of the individual in the program;
Recruitment efforts, e.g., turnover rates, labor market factors, recruitment/retention statistics;
Specialized skills/training, and experience that the applicant may possess that will benefit the agency/program;
Compensation for cost of living disparity as reflected in a salary comparison;
Complexity of duties;
Consistency of pay with others in the organization; and
Responsibilities within the organization
Base salary may be set up to $275,000 per annum at the discretion of the OPDIV except for those employed on time limited appointments. Recommendations for base salary above $275,000 must be submitted by the OPDIV head to the Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA), for approval by the Secretary.
Base salary for employees on time limited appointments may not exceed the rate set in accordance with Pub. L. No. 102-394.
Pay Increases
Automatic cost of living adjustments do not apply to 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) appointments. All pay increases will be performance based, will be consistent with the employee's annual performance appraisal and will be limited to one increase per year. Any pay increase outside of the normal performance cycle requires an exception authorized by the OPDIV head. Such exceptions must be fully documented and justified.
Performance based pay increases will normally be limited to a maximum of six percent. OPDIV heads may authorize higher increases where performance clearly warrants. All pay increases must be fully documented and justified.
Recommended pay increases that will increase base salary above $275,000 per annum, must be submitted by the OPDIV head to ASA for approval by the Secretary. Such requests must be fully documented and justified.
Pay Caps
Base salary cannot exceed $275,000 in a calendar year unless a higher rate is approved by the Secretary.
Total compensation (including recruitment bonuses, retention allowances, and cash awards) cannot exceed $300,000 in a calendar year without the prior approval of the Secretary.
Base salary for employees on time limited appointments may not exceed the rate set in accordance with Pub. L. No. 102-394.
Pay Incentives
Employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) are eligible to receive recruitment, retention, and relocation bonuses. While not covered by the compensation laws and regulations outlined in 5 U.S.C. and 5 C.F.R., the same criteria and coding used for Title 5 employees will be used for employees appointed under Title 42 when making decisions regarding eligibility and implementation of these incentives.
Employees appointed under section 209 (f) cannot receive special salary rates, Physician's Comparability Allowances (PCAs), or Physician Special Pay (Title 38). No exceptions are authorized.
42-80 Initial Appointments
Appointments under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) may only be used to fill scientific positions when recruitment or retention efforts under other available personnel systems, including Title 5 of the U.S. Code, the SBRS, and PHS Commissioned Corps, have failed to yield candidates that possess critical scientific expertise. The recruitment efforts used under other available personnel systems (i.e., Title 5) must be as extensive and exhaustive as those used to recruit under Title 42. These efforts, as well as the scientific credentials of the potential appointee, must be fully documented. Before 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) may be used, the OPDIV must demonstrate that the following criteria have been met:

Efforts to recruit and/or retain under other available personnel systems were attempted, but unsuccessful, and these recruitment efforts must be completed prior to commencing recruitment under Title 42;
The recruitment efforts utilized for other available personnel systems were as extensive as those used to recruit under Title 42 (e.g., nationwide search, ads in professional journals, vacancy information shared with professional organizations, etc.); and
The applicant's credentials, experience, and stature in the scientific community are commensurate with, and directly related to the position being filled.
42-90 Conversions from Other Pay Systems
Conversions are only to be used in exceptional circumstances as outlined in this policy. A scientist may only be converted to a 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) appointment from another pay system if he/she is appropriately peer-reviewed according to the requirements outlined in this instruction and OPDIV procedures and is determined to meet all the following criteria:

Evidence of recognition as a national or international expert in the field, such as: specific experience, invited manuscripts, presentations, and consultations; receipt of honors and/or awards; or other recognition for noteworthy performance or contributions to the field;
Evidence of original scientific or scholarly contributions of major significance in the field;
Evidence of leadership in the field; and
Special knowledge and skills of benefit to the agency.
42-100 Positions Designated as 42 U.S.C. § 209(f)
There are some positions within HHS that require a level of scientific expertise that has historically not been successfully recruited or retained under regular civil service appointment. To expedite the recruitment process and limit the amount of time these positions remain vacant, a subset of high level, mission critical positions within each OPDIV may be designated as 42 U.S.C. § 209(f). This designation will allow such positions to be filled through 42 U.S.C.  § 209(f) without the requirement to document efforts to fill the position through other available personnel systems each time the position is vacated and/or filled. In order to obtain this designation, OPDIV s must submit a request, in accordance with section 42-110 of this instruction, and obtain approval from the Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA).
The list of specific individual and categorical positions, identified in Appendix 3, are covered by this designation.
42-110 Case Documentation and Approval Procedures
A template to document the required justification for initial 42 U.S.C. §209(f) appointments is provided as Appendix 1. The OPDIV must use this template, or develop an equivalent that documents how the criteria outlined in 42-80 of this policy have been met.

