HHS Personnel Instruction 42-1: Appointment of 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) Special Consultants
Issuance Date:  March 11, 2015

Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 42-1, Appointment of 42

U.S.C. § 209(f) Special Consultants, dated March 11, 2015.

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 42-1, Appointment of 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) Special Consultants, dated February 15, 2012.

Background:
This instruction provides guidance to Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions on the minimum eligibility and qualification requirements for appointments made under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f).  Additionally, the Instruction provides guidance on compensation, awards, performance management and benefits for those serving on appointments made under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f).

This issuance is effective immediately.  Implementation under this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, collective bargaining agreements, and Department policy.

/s/
E. J. Holland, Jr.
Assistant Secretary for Administration

42-00 Background
The authority to hire "special consultants" is granted by 42 U.S.C. §209(f) Special Consultants, which provides:

In accordance with regulations, special consultants may be employed to assist and advise in the operations of the Service. Such consultants may be appointed without regard to the civil-service laws.
The implementing regulation, 42 C.F.R. § 22.3(a) Appointments of special consultants, provides:

When the Public Health Service requires the services of consultants who cannot be obtained when needed through regular Civil Service appointment or under the compensation provisions of the Classification Act of 1949, special consultants to assist and advise in the operations of the Service may be appointed, subject to the provisions of the following paragraphs and in accordance with such instructions as may be issued from time to time by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
42-10 Purpose
The policy establishes the minimum qualification and eligibility standards for compliance with the regulation implementing 42 U.S.C. § 209(f). An operating division (OPDIV) may apply more stringent requirements where that OPDIV deems necessary for its purpose. These baseline standards, however, must be adhered to in all instances.

42-20 Authorities
42 U.S.C. § 209(f) Special consultants
42 C.F.R. § 22.3(a) Appointment of special consultants
Pub. L. No. 102-94
42-30 Definitions
Peer Review means the scientific and technical evaluation by a panel of experts who are qualified by training and experience in particular scientific or technical fields, or as authorities knowledgeable in the various disciplines and fields related to the scientific areas under review, to give expert advice concerning the scientific and technical merit and relevance of the subject matter investigated.

Scientific Position means (1) a professional occupation directly involved in the conduct of high-level research studies, regulatory or product reviews, investigations, or experimentations in a branch of natural science, applied science, biomedical science, or related scientific field; or (2) management or supervision of such research studies, regulatory or product reviews, investigations, or experimentations, in which scientific expertise and credentials are required to provide appropriate program direction.

42-40 Coverage
Appointments under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) may only be used to fill scientific positions. The authority will be used only when recruitment or retention efforts under other available and applicable personnel systems, including Title 5 of the United States Code, the Senior Biomedical Research Service (SBRS), and the PHS Commissioned Corps, have failed to yield candidates that possess critical scientific expertise. This instruction does not apply to any other excepted service appointments, including Special Government Employees (SGEs), Expert and Consultants, the SBRS, or those covered by 42 U.S.C. § 209(g).
While employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) are not covered by the laws or regulations outlined in 5 U.S.C or 5 C.F.R, there are instances in which Title 5 principles are used to effectuate actions for employees appointed under 42 U.S.C.§ 209(f).
42-50 Tenure
All appointments, including conversions from other pay systems, to positions under 42 U.S.C. § 209(f) are in the excepted service. Work schedules may be full-time, part-time, or intermittent.
Appointments may be indefinite. That is, they do not have a stated time limit so one may serve an entire Federal career under an indefinite appointment.

42-60 Qualifications
Education
Candidates must meet education requirements in a scientific discipline directly related to the position being filled, in accordance with the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) qualification standards.
At a minimum, the candidate must possess a doctoral-level degree from an accredited institution of higher learning, including: Ph.D., M.D., D.V.M., D.D.S., D.M.D., Sc.D., or other research doctoral-degree widely recognized in U.S. academe as equivalent to a Ph.D. Exceptions to this requirement must be approved by the OP DIV  head or designee and the justification must be documented.
Candidates that have completed part or all of their education outside of the United States must have their foreign education, necessary to meet qualification requirements, evaluated by an accredited organization to ensure that the foreign education is comparable to education received in the United States. It is the responsibility of the candidate to provide written proof of his/her foreign education accreditation prior to appointment. In addition, the servicing human resources office is responsible for verification.
Candidates must furnish proof, prior to appointment (e.g., official transcript; ECFMG certification; foreign education accreditation), that they meet all required education requirements.