42-70 Selection and Appointment
A. Sufficient outreach efforts must be taken to assure that a diverse pool of potential candidates
(e.g. minorities, women, and individuals with disabilities) are made aware of fellowship
opportunities.
B. Official position descriptions are not required. However, the supervisor must prepare a
narrative statement fully describing the duties and responsibilities required. The narrative
statement should be reviewed periodically and updated as necessary to ensure that the duties
are commensurate with the level of compensation. The review should also ensure the
narrative statement accurately reflects the work being performed.
42-80 Compensation
A. Salaries for individuals appointed on a full-time schedule will be set on a per annum basis
commensurate with the applicants' qualifications, experience, and other factors as described
below. Appointments that are on other than a full-time basis will be paid on a pro-rata basis
of an annualized salary.
B. For purposes of this program, the appointee's compensation is the base salary for pay, leave,
and benefits, as well as retention allowances, recruitment/relocation bonuses, and awards,
which are not included in base salary. In determining the base salary, management must
consider such factors as:
Qualifications and stature of individual in his/her professional field;
Salary the Fellow may be expected to receive outside the Federal government for work
similar to his/her fellowship assignment;
Specialized skills/training, and experience that the applicant may possess that will benefit
the agency/program; and
Consistency of pay with others in the organization.
C. Base salary may not exceed the rate set in accordance with Pub. L. No. 102-394.
D. Annual Comparability Increases and Pay Increases
1. Employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. §209(g) may receive annual increases. This may
or may not be the same increase as is applicable to the General Schedule. An annual
increase may not raise an employee’s base salary above the rate set in accordance with
Pub. L. No. 102-394. The OPDIV Head or his/her designee will make this determination
and approve such pay adjustments.
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL
Instruction 42-2: APPOINTMENT OF 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) SERVICE FELLOWS
Issuance Date: September 12, 2012
5
2. Employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. §209(g) also may receive other pay adjustments.
The OPDIV Head or his/her designee must establish the rates and eligibility
requirements. Other pay adjustments may not raise an employee’s base salary above the
rate set in accordance with Pub. L. No. 102-394. All pay adjustments must be fully
documented and justified in accordance with OPDIV policy.
E. Pay Incentives
1. Employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) are eligible to receive recruitment,
retention, and relocation bonuses. While these employees are not covered by the
compensation laws and regulations outlined in 5 U.S.C. and 5 C.F.R., the same criteria
and coding used for Title 5 employees will be used for employees appointed under
Section 209(g) when making decisions regarding eligibility and implementation of these
incentives.
2. Employees appointed under Section 209(g) cannot receive special salary rates,
Physician's Comparability Allowances, or Physician Special Pay under Title 38. No
exceptions are authorized.
F. Travel and Transportation
The following travel allowances may be authorized for employees appointed under 42 U.S.C.
§ 209(g) and are payable under authority of 42 CFR § 61.37, at the same rates authorized for
Title 5 employees. Claims for reimbursement are made in accordance with procedures
prescribed in the DHHS Travel Manual.
1. Travel allowances or transportation and per diem from place of residence, within or
outside the continental United States, to first duty station;
2. Travel allowances or transportation and per diem for any change of duty station during
the term of the fellowship;
3. Travel allowances or transportation and per diem while traveling on official duty away
from the permanent duty station; and
4. Travel allowances or transportation and per diem from last duty station to place of
residence which he/she left to accept the fellowship, or to some other place at no greater
cost to the Government.
42-90 Benefits Including Leave
A. While the laws and regulations found in 5 U.S.C. and 5 C.F.R. do not apply generally to
employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g), the benefits available (e.g., life insurance,
health insurance, retirement, etc.), as well as the criteria for eligibility are the same for both
groups of employees. Specifically, employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) for more
than 12 months (with the exception of non-citizens in overseas locations) will be eligible for
benefits equivalent to those of employees appointed under Title 5.
B. As noted above, although the laws and regulations outlined in 5 U.S.C. and 5 C.F.R. do not
apply generally to employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g), these employees are
covered by the same leave provisions as employees appointed under Title 5.
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL
Instruction 42-2: APPOINTMENT OF 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) SERVICE FELLOWS
Issuance Date: September 12, 2012
6
42-100 Training and Awards
A. Employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) are eligible for training at Government
expense on the same basis as employees appointed under Title 5.
B. Employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) are eligible for performance-based cash
awards, onetime special act awards (including on the spot and time off awards), honorary
awards, and other awards as appropriate.
42-110 Performance Management and Conduct
A. All Title 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) employees must be on a performance plan that meets all
requirements of the appropriate Departmental performance system. Depending on the
performance system, ratings under the performance plan may be used as the basis for pay
decisions.
B. Title 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) employees must maintain acceptable performance and conduct in
order to be retained in their positions.
42-120 Other Actions
A. If an employee voluntarily or involuntarily separates from a Title 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) position
and seeks to return to a non-Title 42 position, the employee may be considered in accordance
with all civil service or Commissioned Corps requirements. Pay of Title 42 U.S.C. § 209(g)
employees, upon converting to a non-Title 42 position, will be set no higher than the
maximum General Schedule pay limitations under Title 5 for civil servants and regular pay
tables (including any applicable special or professional pay) for Commissioned Corps
officers.
B. Prior to appointment or conversion to a Title 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) position, employees must be
informed in writing that they are not entitled to Merit System Protection Board (MSPB)
appeal rights under the Civil Service Reform Act (CSRA).
42-130 Conduct Laws and Regulations
Title 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) employees must comply with all ethical and conduct-related laws and
regulations applicable to other Executive Branch employees. These include laws concerning financial
interests, financial disclosure, and conduct regulations promulgated by the Department, by the Office
of Government Ethics, and other agencies.
42-140 Processing Appointments and Conversions to 42 U.S.C. § 209(g)
A. Initial and Subsequent Appointments. Requests to appoint and/or convert individuals using
42 U.S.C. § 209(g) will be processed in accordance with the OPM Guide to Processing
Personnel Actions.
B. Employees appointed or converted to a 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) position must sign a statement
documenting their understanding that they are accepting an excepted service appointment and
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL
Instruction 42-2: APPOINTMENT OF 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) SERVICE FELLOWS
Issuance Date: September 12, 2012
7
to acknowledge that they are not entitled to MSPB appeal rights under the CSRA.
C. Non-citizens may be appointed as permitted by 42 U.S.C. § 209(h). The non-citizen must
have an appropriate work visa. Appointments and/or extensions of non-citizens may not
exceed the duration of their visas.
42-150 Program Review and Evaluation
The Division of Administration, Office of Human Resources periodically will review appointments
made under the 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) authority to ensure proper use. 