1
Material Transmitted: September 19, 2012
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 42-2, Appointment of 42
U.S.C. § 209(g) Service Fellows.
Background:
This instruction provides guidance to Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions on the
minimum requirements for appointments made under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g). Additionally, the
Instruction provides guidance on compensation, awards, performance management, benefits
and leave for those serving on appointments made under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g).
This issuance is effective immediately. Implementation under this issuance must be carried
out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Department
policy.
 /Denise L. Carter/
 Denise L. Carter
 Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
INSTRUCTION 42-2
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL
Instruction 42-2: APPOINTMENT OF 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) SERVICE FELLOWS
Issuance Date: September 12, 2012
2
HHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 42-2
APPOINTMENT OF 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) SERVICE FELLOWS
42-00 Background
42-10 Purpose
42-20 Authorities
42-30 Coverage
42-40 Tenure
42-50 Qualifications
42-60 Service Fellowship Categories
42-70 Selection and Appointment
42-80 Compensation
42-90 Performance Management and Conduct
42-100 Benefits and Leave
42-110 Awards
42-120 Other Actions
42-130 Conduct Laws and Regulations
42-140 Processing Appointments and Conversions to 42 U.S.C. § 209(g)
42-150 Program Review and Evaluation
42-00 Background
The authority to hire fellows is granted by section 209(g) of the Public Health Service (PHS) Act,
codified at 42 U.S.C. §209(g), which provides:
In accordance with regulations, individual scientists, other than commissioned
officers of the Service, may be designated by the Surgeon General to receive
fellowships, appointed for duty with the Service without regard to the civilservice laws, may hold their fellowships under conditions prescribed therein, and
may be assigned for studies or investigations either in this country or abroad
during the terms of their fellowships.
42-10 Purpose
Service fellowships in the Public Health Service are for the purpose of encouraging and promoting
research, studies, and investigations related to health. Such fellowships may be provided to secure
the services of talented scientists for a period of limited duration for health related research, studies,
and investigations where the nature of the work or the character of the individual's services render
customary employing methods impracticable or less effective.
42-20 Authorities
42 U.S.C. § 209(g) Designation for fellowships; duties; pay
42 U.S.C. § 209(h) Aliens
42 C.F.R. § 61, Subpart B, Service Fellowships
Pub. L. No. 102-394, § 202
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL
Instruction 42-2: APPOINTMENT OF 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) SERVICE FELLOWS
Issuance Date: September 12, 2012
42-30 Coverage
3
A. This policy applies to the establishment of service fellowships in the Public Health Service,
the designation of persons to receive such fellowships, and the appointment of service fellows
under authority of 42 U.S.C. § 209(g). This instruction does not apply to any other excepted
service appointments, including but not limited to, Special Government Employees, Experts
and Consultants, the Senior Biomedical Research Service, or those covered by 42 U.S.C. §
209(f).
B. While the laws or regulations found in 5 U.S.C. or 5 C.F.R. do not apply generally to
employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g), there are instances in which Title 5 principles
are used to effectuate actions for employees appointed under 42 U.S.C. § 209(g).
42-40 Tenure
A. All appointments, including conversions from other pay systems, to positions under 42
U.S.C. § 209(g) are in the excepted service. Work schedules may be full-time or part-time.
B. All appointments must be time-limited – indefinite appointments are not permitted. Initial
appointments may be made for varying periods not in excess of 5 years. Such appointments
may be extended or renewed for varying periods not to exceed 5 years for each period.
Extensions or renewals of appointments are not automatic.
C. Appointments may be terminated before their expiration date for cause (e.g., personal or
scientific misconduct), unsatisfactory performance, or administrative reasons including, but
not limited to, programmatic changes and/or budgetary considerations.
42-50 Qualifications
A. Candidates must meet education requirements in a scientific discipline directly related to the
position being filled, in accordance with the Office of Personnel Management (OPM)
qualification standards.
B. At a minimum, the candidate must possess a doctoral-level degree from an accredited
institution of higher learning, including: Ph.D., M.D., D.V.M., D.D.S., D.M.D., Sc.D., or
other research doctoral-degree widely recognized in U.S. academe as equivalent to a Ph.D.
C. A lower level of education may be acceptable depending on the needs of the particular
fellowship. Such exceptions to this requirement must be approved by the OPDIV head or
designee and the justification must be documented.
D. Candidates who have completed part or all of their education outside of the United States
must, in order to meet qualification requirements, have their foreign education evaluated by
an accredited organization to ensure that the foreign education is comparable to education
received in the United States. It is the responsibility of the candidate to provide written proof
of his/her foreign education accreditation prior to appointment. In addition, the servicing
human resources office is responsible for verification.
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL
Instruction 42-2: APPOINTMENT OF 42 U.S.C. § 209(g) SERVICE FELLOWS
Issuance Date: September 12, 2012
4
E. Candidates must furnish proof, prior to appointment (e.g., official transcript; Education
Commission for Medical Graduates Certification; foreign education accreditation), that they
meet all required education requirements.
42-60 Service Fellowship Categories
OPDIVs are responsible for the establishment of service fellowships, or a series of service
fellowships and shall prescribe, in writing, the conditions under which service fellows will be
appointed and hold their fellowships.