HHS Instruction 42-3: Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service
Issue Date: November 10, 2022

Material Transmitted:
HHS Instruction 42-3, Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service (SBRBPAS), dated November 10, 2022

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 42-3, Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service (SBRBPAS), dated July 9, 2021

OHR Executive and Scientific Resources Division Standard Operating Procedure 300-22, SBRS, dated November 12, 2010

Background:
This issuance of this policy updates titling instructions for official SBRBPAS Expert positions. See 42-3-70(I)2-3.

This Instruction establishes Department policy on employment in the Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service (SBRBPAS). It establishes an HHS-wide policy on managing the Service’s allocations, policy board, and reporting requirements. This Instruction incorporates amendments to the SBRBPAS made by the 21st Century Cures Act (Public Law 114-255, Section 3071).

This issuance is effective immediately and must be carried out by HHS Operating and Staff Division HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

for/W. Robert Leavitt
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources and Chief Human Capital Officer

SUBJECT:     SENIOR BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH AND BIOMEDICAL PRODUCT ASSESSMENT SERVICE
42-3-00           Purpose
42-3-10           References
42-3-20           Coverage and Exclusions
42-3-30           Definitions
42-3-40           Responsibilities
42-3-50           Policy Board
42-3-60           Allocation Management
42-3-70           Appointment Procedures
42-3-80           Compensation
42-3-90           Performance
42-3-100         Removals
42-3-110         Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability

42-3-00           PURPOSE
This Instruction sets forth provisions relating to the employment of scientific and technical experts in the fields of biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, and biomedical product assessment within HHS’ Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service (Service or SBRBPAS) as part of the Department’s Public Health Service. This Instruction also establishes an HHS-wide policy on managing the Service’s allocations, policy board, and reporting requirements.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

42-3-10           REFERENCES
Public Law 114-255, 21st Century Cures Act, Section 3071, Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service - PDF
42 United States Code (U.S.C.), Chapter 6A, Public Health Service 
42 U.S.C. Section 237, Silvio O. Conte Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service 
42 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 24, Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service
Delegation of Human Resources Authorities memo from the HHS Assistant Secretary of Administration, dated October 15, 2019
42-3-20           COVERAGE AND EXCLUSIONS
Coverage. This Instruction covers scientific and technical experts in the fields of biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, and biomedical product assessment within the SBRBPAS. HHS Operating and Staff Divisions (OpDivs/StaffDivs) who are components of the Public Health Service and have been authorized allocations may utilize the SBRBPAS authority.
Exclusions. This Instruction only covers SBRBPAS positions under 42 U.S.C §237. All other Title 42 appointment authorities are excluded.
Bargaining Unit Employees. The provisions of this Instruction about conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees (e.g., the filling of a position within the scope of the bargaining unit, promotion and reassignments, adverse actions, and reorganizations) are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71 , and such actions require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees. When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements of applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
42-3-30           DEFINITIONS
Biomedical product assessment. The area of science is dedicated to developing or evaluating delivery systems of products, processes, and/or technologies designed to prevent and treat disease and/or promote health.
Biomedical research. The area of science is devoted to studying the biological processes of life, disease prevention and treatment, health promotion, and social, genetic, and environmental factors related to health and diseases.
Clinical research evaluation. The area of science is dedicated to evaluating behavioral and biomedical interventions to prevent and treat disease and promote health.
Excepted Service. Positions that are not in the competitive service or the Senior Executive Service (SES); include all positions in the Executive Branch of the Federal Government which are specifically excepted from the requirements of the competitive service by statute, Executive Order, or by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) regulation.
Expert. An individual qualified via education and experience to perform biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, and/or biomedical product assessment, as defined in this Instruction, beyond the typical range of achievement of competent scientific and/or technical persons in those fields. Their professional community recognized them as an authority or practitioner of outstanding competence and skill in biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, and/or biomedical product assessment.
Public Health Service (PHS). A division of HHS focused on protecting, promoting, and advancing public health and safety. The Assistant Secretary of Health (OASH) oversees the PHS, including the Commissioned Corps (not covered by this Instruction/authority). Ten (10) HHS Operating Divisions/Staff Divisions (OpDivs/StaffDivs) are PHS components:
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR);
Office of Global Affairs (OGA);
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ);
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR);
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC);
Food and Drug Administration (FDA);
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA);
Indian Health Service (IHS);
National Institutes of Health (NIH); and
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA).
