
42-3-100           REMOVALS
The Head of the OpDiv/StaffDiv may authorize disciplinary action, including removal from SBRBPAS, for substandard performance, misconduct, national security reasons, or other reasons as determined by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head (42 CFR §24.8). This authority may not be redelegated.
SBRBPAS employees are not covered by the Title 5 provisions dealing with adverse actions (5 U.S.C. Chapter 75) or performance-based removal actions (5 U.S.C. Chapter (42 U.S.C. §237(b)); however, in accordance with the provisions outlined in 42 CFR §24.8, an SBRBPAS employee for whom a disciplinary action is proposed is entitled to:
A written notice of the proposed action and the basis of the action;
A reasonable opportunity to respond to the notice of proposed action both orally and in writing;
The right to be represented by an attorney or other representative in making such an answer; and
A written decision on the proposed action.
This process may not be appealed to a third party, and there is no right to further review an adverse action's final decision. At his/her discretion, the Secretary may review an action taken and may reduce, suspend, or overrule the action taken by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head (42 CFR §24.8).
SBRBPAS employees have no right to appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB). Servicing Employee Relations staff must be consulted prior to any adverse or performance-based action of an SBRBPAS employee to ensure compliance with applicable federal laws, regulations, HHS policy, and bargaining unit obligations.
SBRBPAS employees are not covered by Title 5 provisions relating to retention preference in a Reduction in Force (RIF) or Chapter 35, Subchapter I (42 U.S.C. §237(b)). In a RIF, SBRBPAS employees may be released prior to a RIF as part of an OpDiv/StaffDiv’s workforce restructuring efforts to avoid a RIF, or alternatively, an OpDiv/StaffDiv may choose not to separate all or any SBRBPAS employees before or during a RIF. Decisions regarding which SBRBPAS functions/positions to abolish before or during a RIF must be based on mission and/or budget. The Secretary or designee must be notified of proposed workforce restructuring efforts and/or reorganizations that eliminate SBRBPAS functions/positions. See also Section 42-3-60, Allocation Management.
An SBRBPAS employee who is removed from the Service involuntarily and without cause may be non-competitively appointed by the OpDiv/StaffDiv Head to a position in the competitive service at the GS-15 grade level if that employee was a career employee in the competitive service or the SES immediately prior to his/her SBRBPAS appointment. An employee who was not a career employee in the competitive service or the SES immediately before their appointment to the SBRBPAS may be placed in a GS- 15 excepted service position not to exceed two years (42 U.S.C. §237(e) and 5 CFR §24.8). These appointment actions are discretionary; however, if non-competitively appointed, such employees must meet the OPM Qualification Requirements for the series/grade of the new position.
42-3-110           DOCUMENTATION, REPORTING, AND ACCOUNTABILITY
Documentation. Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third-party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the National Archives & Records Administration (NARA) record disposition schedule. Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for three (3) full years. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after the official notification from OPM, the Department of Justice, or the Office of the General Counsel, etc., that the matter has been fully litigated or resolved and closed.
Reporting. Consistent with 42 CFR §24.9:
OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers will submit an initial report to ASA/OHR at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov by September 30, 2020. Reports must be submitted annually after that by September 30 and include the following information:
An analysis of the extent to which the recruitment and retention of outstanding and qualified scientific, medical, or technical experts in the fields of biomedical, medical research, clinical research evaluation, and biomedical product assessment have improved or otherwise been affected by the amendments in the 21st Century Cures Act (Public Law 114-255), including if the authority is allowing the OpDiv/StaffDiv to obtain the necessary expertise, and if any changes to the current law/regulations are needed.
The total number of SBRBPAS members who have been hired by the division, including first and last name; position title; occupational series; field (biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, or biomedical product assessment); doctoral or master’s degree; and date of peer review committee certification.
Source of recruitment for each SBRBPAS member. If the member was converted from another pay system, identify title/series/grade; and
The earnings of each member immediately prior to appointment to the SBRBPAS and pay upon appointment.
ASA/OHR may request additional information from each participating OpDiv/StaffDiv to assist the Policy Board or the Secretary (or designee) on allocation management and analysis of SBRBPAS operations; to ensure consistent application of the law, regulations, and this Instruction; and to recommend legislative changes to the Secretary as necessary.
Accountability. ASA/OHR will conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Endnotes
1 2000 in accordance with 42 U.S.C. §237

2 $400,000 per annum as of the date of this Instruction.