
42-3-60           ALLOCATION MANAGEMENT
SBRBPAS allocations1 directly support HHS’ biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, and biomedical product assessment goals and priorities.
The Secretary or designee approves the assignment of SBRBPAS allocations within OpDivs/StaffDivs and may adjust allocation assignments (42 CFR §24.2).
A minimum of five percent (5%) of total SBRBPAS allocations are reserved for critical hires to address mission-critical needs, new HHS initiatives, Congressional priorities, etc.
Allocation assignments are as follows: AHRQ 16; CDC 103; FDA 373; NIH 1261; Reserved 247, as of the date of this Instruction.
SBRBPAS allocation requests are submitted by the Head of the OpDiv/StaffDiv to the Secretary via the ASA/OHR for approval.
The Secretary or designee is notified of workforce restructuring efforts and/or reorganizations that will eliminate SBRBPAS functions/positions. (Reorganizations also require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees.) Allocations supporting such eliminated missions/functions are returned to the HHS SBRBPAS reserve pool. However, in cases where the former mission/function is replaced by a new mission/function that requires scientific and technical experts in the fields of biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, or biomedical product assessment within the same OpDiv/StaffDiv, the division may retain the allocations upon request.
42-3-70           APPOINTMENT PROCEDURES
Citizenship. HHS, along with many other federal agencies receiving appropriated funds, is restricted by the annual appropriations act from compensating an individual who is not a U.S. Citizen or national of the United States for a federal position. (Note: 42 U.S.C. §237 differs from 42 U.S.C. §§209(f) and (g). 42 U.S.C. §209(h) authorizes the employment of an individual who is not a U.S. Citizen or national of the United States to 42 U.S.C. §§209(f) and (g) positions that otherwise would be prohibited by the annual appropriations act ban on the compensation of non-citizens. No such language is in 42 U.S.C. §237.) HR Centers should consult their legal counsel to identify and comply with annual agency-specific appropriations restrictions and exclusions related to hiring an individual who is not a U.S. citizen for an SBRBPAS position.
Classification. In accordance with 42 U.S.C. §237(b), SBRBPAS positions are not covered by the classification provisions of Title 5 (5 U.S.C. Chapter 51); however, in the absence of HHS SBRBPAS Classification Standards for scientific and medical positions and until such standards are developed and validated, SBRBPAS job series are determined using the OPM Position Classification Standards. Official position descriptions are not required; however, a statement of duties certified by the supervisor must be issued, which must contain the major duties and responsibilities in the field(s) of biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, or biomedical product assessment to support the series to which the position is being classified, including supervisory controls. See also I., Personnel Actions below.
Eligibility and Qualification Requirements.
To be eligible for an SBRBPAS appointment, the individual must have a doctoral level degree in biomedicine or a related biological field, or a doctoral or master’s level degree in engineering, bioinformatics, or a related or emerging field and meet the OPM Qualification Standards for a General Schedule (GS) 15 level position in the applicable professional or scientific series (42 U.S.C. §237(b) and 42 CFR §24.4).
In addition, the individual must be considered an expert in at least one (1) of the following fields (42 CFR §24.4):
Biomedical research. An individual actively engaged in original biomedical research, including behavioral research, and whose work in this area is considered by recognized experts or peers in the field of biomedical research to be outstanding. One or more of the following achievements must be present to demonstrate the individual has received such recognition: the individual a) conducted original biomedical research published in peer-reviewed journals of high stature; b) received major prizes and awards (such as visiting professorships and named lectureships) in recognition of original contributions to biomedical research; c) received invitations to speak at or chair major national or international meetings or symposia; d) elected to membership in professional societies of high stature, or e) meets other criteria demonstrating sufficient rigor or accomplishment in a relevant or closely related field that is necessary to accomplish the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s mission.
Clinical research evaluation. An individual who is actively engaged in clinical research evaluation and whose work in this area is considered by recognized experts or peers in the field of clinical research evaluation to be outstanding. One or more of the following achievements must be present to demonstrate the individual has received such recognition: the individual a) has significant experience dealing with complex, precedent-setting evaluation issues, including those arising during product development that involved significant scientific controversy, had far-reaching implications for clinical research or resulted in a widespread economic effect in the health-care delivery system; b) has taken an active role in the development of significant scientific or regulatory guidelines for clinical research evaluation, c) received invitations to speak at or to chair major national or international meetings and symposia; or d) meets other criteria demonstrating sufficient rigor or accomplishment in a relevant or closely related field that is necessary to the achievement of the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s mission.
Biomedical product assessment. An individual who is actively engaged in the development or assessment of biomedical products and whose work in this area is considered by recognized experts or peers in the field of biomedical product assessment to be outstanding. One or more of the following achievements must be present to demonstrate the individual has received such recognition: the individual a) has significant experience dealing with complex, precedent-setting evaluation, scientific policies, or development issues (e.g., those associated with novel biomedical products, novel approaches to the biomedical product- manufacturing, or use of novel evaluation methods); b) demonstrated cutting-edge expertise in a scientific or technical discipline critical to design, development, manufacturing, clinical performance assessment, or technical aspects of effective oversight of biomedical products; c) played a leadership role in planning and conducting public meetings to seek public input and communicate scientific, regulatory policies; d) received invitations to speak at or chair major national or international meets and symposia; or e) meets other criteria demonstrating sufficient rigor or accomplishment in a relevant or closely related activity or field that is necessary to the achievement of the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s mission.