42-3-80           COMPENSATION
Pay System and Aggregate Limit on Pay.
SBRBPAS is specifically exempt from the provisions of Title 5 relating to the General Schedule pay rates (5 U.S.C. Chapter 53, Subchapter III).
SBRBPAS has an ungraded pay system with a single flexible pay band that applies to each member. Annual pay for SBRBPAS members is administratively determined on a case-by-case basis. Base pay shall not be less than the minimum rate payable for the GS-15 of the General Schedule base table nor exceed the president’s pay, excluding expenses, as specified in 3 U.S.C. §1022. There is no authority to defer pay exceeding the pay cap to a subsequent calendar year.
Pay at the higher end of the pay range should be established only to recognize individual scientific value and expertise necessary to recruit and retain exceptionally well-qualified scientists and technical experts in one of the fields identified in this Instruction (42 CFR §24.5(a)). See Eligibility and Qualification Requirements under Section 42-3-70, Appointment Procedures.
Setting Pay, Including Pay Increases.
The OpDiv/StaffDiv Head is authorized to set annual pay, including pay increases, for SBRBPAS members up to $275,000 per annum. Annual pay exceeding this
The amount must be approved in writing by the Secretary or designee before its effective date.
Pay determinations must document the following criteria (42 CFR §24.5):
Impact of the individual on the field of biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, or biomedical product assessment;
Recognition of the individual by his/her peers in the respective field;
Originality of the individual’s ideas or work products;
Specific clinical or highly technical skills of the individual that are of benefit to the division and are in addition to the requirements of the basic scientific assignment;
The individual’s current earnings and monetary benefits; and
Other relevant factors.
Performance-based increases must be consistent with each member’s annual performance appraisal and are limited to one (1) such increase in a calendar year. Justifications for performance-based increases outside of the normal performance cycle must discuss with specificity the precise achievements of the member that form the basis for the increase. Generally, performance-based increases are capped at 6%. However, increases exceeding this amount may be approved, and the member’s achievements that form the basis for the higher rate are documented.
SBRBPAS members are not entitled to an automatic annual cost of living increases except to avoid a member’s pay falling below the minimum rate payable for the GS- 15 of the General Schedule base table. However, with the advice of the Policy Board, the Secretary or designee may implement an across-the-board annual cost of living increase, the rate of which is at the Secretary’s discretion, subject to the pay limitations in this Instruction. The effective date of such an increase is the first day of the first pay period on or after January 1 of the upcoming calendar year (42 CFR §24.5(c)).
Pay adjustments pay will take effect on the first day of the first pay period following approval from the approving authority unless a later date is specified.
SBRBPAS annual pay is pay for all purposes.
Other Compensation. SBRBPAS members are eligible for incentives (including recruitment, relocation, and retention incentives under 5 CFR Part 575) and awards unless precluded explicitly by statute or regulations.
Benefits. SBRBPAS employees are eligible for all federal civil service benefits such as life and health insurance, dental and vision insurance, retirement, Flexible Spending Accounts, Long Term Care Insurance, and leave, etc. Benefits available for SBRBPAS employees on time-limited appointments may vary depending on the length of their appointment. There is no impact on federal benefits, leave accrual, etc., for most employees when moving to/from SBRBPAS and Title 5 competitive/excepted services. However, SES Career employees will not retain SES benefits, e.g., Presidential Rank Awards, when converted to SBRBPAS. Former SES Career and Scientific/Senior Level (ST/SL) employees are not entitled to the higher SES/ST/SL annual leave accrual rate, and their new leave accrual rate is determined based on his/her years of creditable service upon conversion to SBRBPAS (5 CFR §630.301(d)). In accordance with 5 CFR §630.301(g), any accumulated annual leave exceeding the 240-hour maximum will remain available for the employee’s use subject to reduction under procedures identical to those described in 5 U.S.C. §6304(c).
42-3-90           PERFORMANCE
In accordance with 42 U.S.C. §237(b), SBRBPAS positions are not covered by the provisions of Title 5 relating to performance appraisal and performance actions (5 U.S.C. Chapter 43); however, SBRBPRS members are covered by the HHS Performance Management Appraisal Program (PMAP) which provides a systematic appraisal of performance and encourages excellence in performance by members, as required by 42 U.S.C. §237(c) and 42 CFR §24.6.
See HHS Instruction, 430-1, Performance Management Appraisal Program, for policy guidance.

