Recruitment Procedures.
SBRBPAS is specifically exempt by 42 U.S.C. §237(b) from the Title 5 appointment procedures (5 U.S.C. Chapter 33, Subchapter I); however, SBRBPAS positions are filled based on merit.
OpDivs/StaffDivs are responsible for ensuring SBRBPAS candidates meet this Instruction's eligibility and qualification requirements. The servicing Human Resources Office should conduct an initial evaluation prior to the peer review committee review (see E., Peer Review Committee below) to ensure candidates are eligible for consideration.
Candidates must furnish proof (i.e., official transcripts) that they meet the education and other (e.g., professional licensure) requirements before the appointment. Foreign-educated candidates from certain countries may be unable to provide official transcripts. If necessary, a copy of the diploma with an official English translation may be accepted in those cases. However, if the diploma does not indicate the specific field in which the doctorate was awarded, an official transcript, with an official translation, is required.
Post-high school education or training must meet the criteria described under ‘Educational and Training Provisions’ in OPM’s General Schedule Qualification Policy. (Note: Foreign education must meet these education and training provisions; and be evaluated by one (1) of the following national associations of credential evaluation services: National Association of Credential Evaluation Services (NACES) or Association of International Credentials Evaluators (AICE). In lieu of an evaluation, possession of a valid and current U.S. professional license by a graduate of a foreign professional school or program is sufficient proof that the foreign education has been determined to be equivalent to the requisite U.S. professional education in that occupational field.)
Official job offers are made by OpDiv/StaffDiv HR Centers, contingent upon satisfactory completion of all employment requirements, e.g., security, ethics clearance for positions required to file a Public Financial Disclosure Report, etc.
Peer Review Committee. To provide an open, systemic, and equitable hiring process that ensures positions are filled based on merit, an individual may not be considered for an SBRBPAS appointment unless a peer has reviewed his/her qualifications review committee that certifies the individual meets the eligibility and qualification requirements for the position and recommends appointment to the Service.
SBRBPAS candidate qualifications are evaluated by OpDiv/StaffDiv’s peer review committee before the initial appointment. OpDivs/StaffDivs may use single or multiple committees to determine if the SBRBPAS candidate meets the qualification requirements.
Committee(s) shall consist of at least three (3) current and/or former SBRBPAS members (former SBRBPAS members shall not have been removed for cause and must be current employees of the OpDiv/StaffDiv or another PHS component) who are subject matter experts in the same or related field of the position (i.e., expert knowledge of the competencies needed to perform the position).
Committee members must not be bargaining unit employees.
The committee must provide a written recommendation/certification based on the candidate’s education and professional experience.
The committee’s recommendation must be based on a majority of the members.
Committee members must recuse themselves from serving on committees in which they are a relative (as defined by 5 U.S.C. §3110) or have a personal relationship with one (1) or more candidates.
Peer review recommendations are retained by OpDiv/StaffDiv in the recruitment case file. See also Section 42-3-110, Documentation.
Conversions From Other Pay Systems.
HHS employees may be converted to the SBRBPAS if they meet all eligibility and qualification requirements in this Instruction and are peer-reviewed according to the requirements outlined in this Instruction. Conversions should only be considered in exceptional circumstances, such as the retention of an employee who possesses hard-to-fill mission-critical competencies or a special need for the employee’s services that makes it essential to retain the employee. Justification for the conversion must be documented on the SF-50, Notification of Personnel Action form.
Employees lose appeal rights upon conversion to the SBRBPAS since the SBRBPAS is not covered by the Title 5 provisions dealing with adverse actions (5 U.S.C. Chapter 75) or performance-based removal actions (5 U.S.C. Chapter 43). (See also Section 42-3-100, Removals). Employees serving on a Career SES or Scientific/Senior Level (ST/SL) appointments are additionally impacted upon conversion to the SBRBPAS (see Benefits under Section 42-3-80, Compensation). The employee must be notified in writing of the changes and must provide a written statement before conversion acknowledging he/she is voluntarily leaving his/her current position to accept an SBRBPAS position under 42 U.S.C §237.
Employees who previously held a non-temporary competitive service position or a Career SES position retain their career status and may continue to apply to competitive service positions open to ‘Status’ candidates. (They should be advised to provide an SF-50 showing they previously held a non-temporary competitive service position when applying to jobs.)
Type of Appointment. SBRBPAS employees may be appointed to temporary, intermittent, or permanent excepted service positions. Appointments to the excepted service do not give competitive status.
Trial Period. SBRBPAS employees serve at the will of the agency, in accordance with 42 U.S.C. §237(b), and do not serve trial or probationary periods. See also Section 42-3-100, Removals.
Personnel Actions.
When processing personnel actions, OPM’s Guide to Processing Personnel Actions, Chapter 11, Excepted Service Appointments, is used, and 42 U.S.C §237 must be cited as the excepted service authority that authorizes the SBRBPAS appointment.
The SBRBPAS pay plan is ‘RS’ in accordance with OPM’s Guide to Data Standards. Series is determined in accordance with OPM’s Position Classification Standards. No General Schedule grade is assigned in accordance with 42 U.S.C. §237. 
For consistency and reporting purposes, the official basic position title for non-supervisory work is SBRBPAS Expert.
Add the prefix Supervisory if the work meets the criteria for supervisor or manager as defined in the General Schedule Supervisory Guide (Supervisory Code 2.)
Add the prefix Lead if the work meets the criteria for the leader as defined in the General Schedule Leader Grade Evaluation Guide (Supervisory Code 7.)
Add the suffix Manager if the position meets the definition of supervisor in 5 U.S.C. 7103(a)(10) but does not meet the minimum requirements for application of the General Schedule Supervisory Guide.  (Supervisory Code 4)
Parenthetical titles may supplement the authorized position titles if necessary for recruitment or other human resources needs.
Organizational and functional titles complement official position titles and may be established for internal administration, public convenience, program management, or similar purposes.
