42-3-40           RESPONSIBILITIES
HHS Secretary or designee:
Ensures SBRBPAS allocations are used in direct support of HHS goals and priorities in the areas of biomedical research, clinical research evaluation, and biomedical product assessment;
Approves the number of allocations assigned to each OpDiv/StaffDiv based on the current mission and the need for such scientific and technical expertise;
Approves pay requests exceeding $275,000 per annum; and
May establish an SBRBPAS Policy Board.
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding HHS-wide Title 42 human resources authorities consistent with HHS policy and all applicable federal laws and regulations;
Reviews SBRBPAS allocation requests from OpDivs/StaffDivs and makes recommendations to the Secretary or designee via the Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA);
Reviews pay requests exceeding $275,000 per annum and make recommendations to the Secretary or designee via the ASA;
Notifies the Secretary or designee of reorganizations that result in the elimination of SBRBPAS functions/positions;
Serves as the liaison with the General Accountability Office regarding studies required by P.L. 114-255; and
Periodically reviews PHS Components’ SBRBPAS procedures, actions, and reports to assure conformance with this Instruction and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads:
Ensure their division’s SBRBPAS allocations are utilized by law, regulations, and this Instruction.
Have the delegated authority to:
Request approval by the Secretary or designee, via ASA/OHR, for SBRBPAS allocations.
Approve the appointment of SBRBPAS members consistent with the eligibility and qualifications requirements described in this Instruction.
Approve initial pay and pay adjustments of SBRBPAS members up to $275,000 per annum consistent with the criteria in this Instruction.
Request approval by the Secretary or designee, via ASA/OHR, for annual pay for member(s) over $275,000 per annum.
Discipline or remove an SBRBPAS member for cause by the procedures in this Instruction.
Appoint a former SBRBPAS member who is removed without cause to a position covered by Title 5 by the criteria in this Instruction.
Approvals for the actions specified under this section (42-3-40 C. 2.) must be in writing.
Notify ASA/OHR of reorganization or workforce restructuring efforts that eliminate SBRBPAS functions/positions.
Recommend a representative from their division to serve on the SBRBPAS Policy Board if the Secretary or designee establishes a board.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources (HR) Centers:
Comply with this Instruction and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Provide an open, systematic, and equitable hiring process that ensures SBRBPAS positions are filled based on merit.
Establish peer review committee(s) to review the qualifications of SBRBPAS candidates.
Ensure SBRBPAS employees’ qualifications are certified prior to initial appointment by a peer review committee.
42-3-50           POLICY BOARD
A Policy Board may be established by the Secretary or designee to advise on allocation management, administration of the SBRBPAS authority and to ensure the SBRBPAS regulations, policy, and procedural guidelines are consistently applied and adhered to. The Board may provide recommendations on allocation requests and distribution among the participating OpDiv/StaffDivs, and any other matter as determined by the Secretary or designee. (42 CFR §24.3)
If a board is established, membership will include the Office of Assistant Secretary of Administration and the OpDivs/StaffDivs with SBRBPAS allocations. The Board shall consist of the Assistant Secretary for Administration or designee, who will serve as the Board’s chairperson, and the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources or designee. Each participating OpDiv/StaffDiv will have one (1) representative nominated by their OpDiv/StaffDiv Head or designee, serving two (2) year terms. The chairperson may renew the terms upon request of the OpDiv/StaffDiv. Representatives should have familiarity with the SBRBPAS authority, regulations, procedural guidelines, and this Instruction.
