
Relationship to Other Personnel Actions
Probationary Periods:  New employees must be closely observed during the probationary/trial period to determine whether they are a good fit for the position.  Periodic progress reviews to assess performance during the probationary period are helpful to validate qualifications and job fitness.  Generally, a probationary employee may be removed at any time during the probationary period for any reason, including demonstrating “Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR)” performance; however, the OpDiv/StaffDiv’s LER staff must be consulted prior to initiating any performance based or adverse action to ensure the requirements specified under 5 CFR Parts 432 and 752 are followed and the proposed action is legally supportable (HHS Instruction, 315-1, Probation and Trial Periods).
 Reduction-in-Force (RIF):  Ratings of record are used to establish service credit for RIF purposes.  For RIF purposes, the rating of record is the annual summary rating that is assigned at the end of the appraisal period that was signed, approved, and issued to the employee by an appropriate management official or a rating of record assigned following completion of a performance improvement period.  A Rating Official may not assign an employee a new rating of record for the sole purpose of affecting their retention standing.  Ratings of record that were due before the date of specific RIF notices, but were not officially approved and placed on record until on or after the date of the specific notices, will not be used to determine additional service credit (HHS Instruction, 351-1 Reduction in Force, and 5 CFR Part 351).
430-1-100 Documentation and Accountability
Performance records must be retained for four (4) years, under 5 CFR § 293.404, and transferred with the employee's electronic Official Personnel File (eOPF) when the employee transfers to a new organization within HHS or to another federal agency.
Performance ratings of record, including the performance plans on which they are based, shall be retained for 4 years.  When an employee is reassigned to a new Rating Official within the Department during the performance cycle, that rating plan is closed out, and does not transfer with the employee but is retained in the employee’s eOPF for 4 years.
Supporting documents shall be retained for up to four (4) years.
Performance records superseded (e.g., through an administrative or judicial procedure) shall be destroyed, and performance-related records pertaining to a former employee (except as prescribed in 5 CFR § 293.405(a) shall be retained for a minimum of 2 years.
Notices of proposed demotion or removal issued but not executed, and all related documents, pursuant to 5 U.S.C. § 4303(d) must be destroyed after the employee completes one year of acceptable performance from the date of the written advance notice of the proposed removal or reduction in grade notice.
Except where prohibited by law, retention of automated records longer than the maximum prescribed here is permitted for purposes of statistical analysis so long as the data are not used in any action affecting the employee when the manual record has been or should have been destroyed.
Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule.  Generally, records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years.  Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed, or if the time limits associated with grievance processes have passed (e.g., before the anniversary date).
OHR will conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Endnotes:
1 Bargaining Unit employees’ minimum performance period may differ and Rating Officials should consult the applicable Collective Bargaining Agreement.