Employees
Provide input and feedback to the Rating Official in the development of performance elements, standards, and measures;
Request clarification of performance expectations from the Rating Official, if necessary;
Perform at full potential, support team endeavors, and pursue professional development to support performance and results;
Identify issues, or other obstacles, which may hinder the accomplishment of performance expectations, and work with the Rating Official to resolve them;
Continuously seek performance feedback;
Participate in progress reviews and performance appraisals by providing input to the Rating Official on accomplishments toward achieving performance expectations;
Complete required Performance Management training as assigned by the PMAP Coordinator.
Labor and Employee Relations staff consult with supervisors with regard to performance-related issues requiring corrective action.
430-1-50 Performance Management Cycle
The appraisal cycle is on a calendar year cycle beginning on January 1 of each year and ending on December 31.
Rating Officials will consistently measure employee performance and provide ongoing oral or written feedback to employees on their progress toward reaching their performance goals.  Rating Officials will meet with employees three times per year to give feedback on the employee’s performance.  The reviews may incorporate feedback from key stakeholders and from the employee.  These reviews typically will occur to establish the performance plan, to provide a mid-year review, and to close out the performance plan with a rating of record.
The Rating Official must engage LER if, at any time, the employee’s performance is less than the “Achieved Expected Results (AE)” level.
430-1-60 Performance Planning
Rating Officials will set performance expectations and goals for employees to channel their efforts toward achieving organizational objectives.  Performance elements and standards should be SMART – specific, measurable, attainable, relevant, and timely.
Either the employee or the Rating Official may initiate the performance plan.
Standards must be written at the “Achieved Expected Results (AE)” level and be based on the requirements of the position.  If substantive changes are made to critical elements and performance standards, the changes are effective when presented in writing to the employee. The employee must be granted a minimum of 901 days to demonstrate acceptable performance before being evaluated on those elements.
All performance plans must link at least one critical element to the organizational Strategic Plan at the Department, Operating Division, or Staff Division level, and must include relevant tasks at the appropriate level of responsibility of the position.
Required Performance Elements
Supervisory employees must have a minimum of three (3) but no more than six (6) critical elements. These must include:
HHS standard Leadership Element
Supervisors will have a set of required performance standards.
Supervisors may not remove or edit the established standards but may include additional standards.
Customer Experience Element.  While the element definition cannot be changed, Rating Officials can include custom performance standards under the element.
At least one (1) individual Critical Element.
Non-supervisory employees must have a minimum of two (2), but no more than six (6) critical elements. These must include:
HHS standard Customer Experience Element, applicable to all employees, and
At least one (1) individual Critical Element.
All performance plans include at least one critical element linked to the organizational Strategic Plan at the Department, Operational Division, or Staff Division level, and include relevant tasks at the appropriate level of responsibility of the position.
430-1-70 Rating Performance
Employees who have been under a documented performance plan for 901 days or more should receive a Rating of Record at the end of the appraisal period.  When required by the OpDiv/StaffDiv, the Rating Official should obtain the Reviewing Official’s signature prior to discussion of the final rating with the employee. 

