
Determining Element Ratings:  Ratings are based on a comparison of performance with the standards established for the appraisal period.  Rating Officials, at the end of the annual appraisal period, should solicit performance input from former supervisors for those employees who have changed positions or supervisors during the appraisal period.  (see Table 1).
Element Comments:  Written comments are recommended for each element rated higher or lower than “Achieved Expected Results (AE).”
Table 1: Critical Element Ratings	Points Assigned
Level 5: Achieved Outstanding Results (AO)	5.00
Level 4: Achieved More Than Expected Results (AM)	4.00
Level 3: Achieved Expected Results (AE)	3.00
Level 2: Partially Achieved Expected Results (PA)	2.00
Level 1: Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR) 	1.00
Determining Summary Rating:  Summary ratings are determined based on a review of all the critical element ratings.
After rating and assigning a score to each critical element, the Rating Official will total the points and divide that by the number of critical elements to arrive at an average score (up to two decimal places).
This score will be converted to a summary rating using the point values in Table II.
If an employee receives a “Partially Achieved Expected Results (PA)” rating on one or more critical elements, he or she cannot receive a summary rating of higher than “Achieved Expected Results (AE)”.
A summary rating of “Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR)” must be assigned to any employee who is rated “Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR)” on any critical element.
An element rating of Not Rated (NR) will not affect the average score used to determine the summary rating.
Table II: Summary Ratings	Points
Level 5: Achieved Outstanding Results (AO)	4.50 to 5.00
Level 4: Achieved More Than Expected Results (AM)	3.60 to 4.49
Level 3: Achieved Expected Results (AE)	3.00 to 3.59
Level 2: Partially Achieved Expected Results (PA)	2.00 to 2.99
Level 1: Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR) 	1.00 to 1.99
Narrative Summaries:  Rating Officials must provide a narrative summary rating when an employee’s performance is at the “Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR)” or “Achieved Outstanding Results (AO)” level.  The narrative should contain examples of the employee’s performance which substantiate how the employee’s performance falls within the levels assigned.  Narratives are recorded on the performance plan.
Disagreement with Rating:  Recognizing that there may be differences of opinion between employees and Rating Officials on performance assessments and ratings, employees may respond to performance ratings and request reconsideration.  Employee comments become a part of the official appraisal rating of record.
Employees who desire to add such written comments shall have seven (7) calendar days from the date of the issuance of the appraisal.
Employee comments must be reviewed by the Rating and Reviewing Officials to determine whether these comments warrant any changes in the element or summary ratings to be submitted for the record.
Reviewing Officials may elect to change the rating of record. This amended rating will be entered into the performance plan and signed by the Reviewing Official and the employee.
Employees being reduced in grade or removed based on performance have the right to appeal to the Merit Systems Protection Board; or if an employee believes he or she was discriminated against based on any of the protected classes or actions, an EEO complaint may be filed.
430-1-80 Recognizing and Rewarding Performance
Performance awards are linked to the rating of record and are submitted and considered for approval only at the conclusion of the rating period.
All performance awards are at the discretion of the OpDiv/StaffDiv and are subject to funds availability. According to OPM, no employee is entitled to an award.
For more information on recognizing and rewarding performance, please refer to HHS Instruction 451-1, Incentive Awards.
430-1-90 Appraisal Program Requirements
Training Requirements
Rating Officials:  Every Rating Official must be trained in the policies and practices of performance management to ensure its effective administration.  Training on developing performance plans, conducting progress reviews, assigning ratings, coaching, and using appraisals as a key factor in making other management decisions will be provided to managers and supervisors.  Any individual hired into their first supervisory position should receive performance management training within one year of being hired.  Other seasoned supervisors should receive a performance management training at least once every three years.  Rating Officials are expected to explain the system to subordinate employees and provide performance management training to enable them to understand the specific aspects of their performance plan.
Employees:  Employees are recommended to take training within one year of being hired at HHS and at least once every three years thereafter.
Monitoring and Evaluating:  Generally, each OpDiv/StaffDiv has the responsibility for monitoring, evaluating, and auditing its PMAP, including issues arising from, and connected to, performance-based awards, within the framework of these guidelines.  Each OpDiv/StaffDiv should monitor, evaluate, and audit its PMAP at least once every three years.
Recordkeeping and Record Uses:  As part of monitoring performance, supervisors may make notes on significant instances of performance so that the instances will not be forgotten.  Such notes are not required by HHS or any of its OpDivs/StaffDivs. Such notes are not subject to the Privacy Act as long as they:
remain solely for the personal use of the supervisor;
are not provided to any other person;
are not used for any other purposes; and
are retained or discarded at the supervisor's sole discretion.
The retention, maintenance, accessibility, and disposal of performance records, as well as supervisors' copies, will be in accordance with OPM regulations and this policy.

