430-1-30 Definitions
Acceptable Level of Competence:  Performance by an employee that warrants advancement of the employee's rate of basic pay to the next higher step of the grade or the next higher rate within the grade (as defined in this section) of his or her position, subject to the requirements of § 531.404 of this subpart, as determined by the head of the agency (or designee). § 531.403 Definitions.
Achieved Expected Results (AE) Level of Performance:  An employee’s performance of the duties and responsibilities of their assigned position reflects at least the “Achieved Expected Results (AE)” level in all critical elements.  The employee fully meets the expectations outlined in the standards; the results meet the standards for quality, quantity, and/or timeliness associated with the objective and were achieved with the appropriate level of guidance.  Performance must be at this level for the employee to receive a within-grade increase to the next higher step of the grade, or the next higher grade in a career ladder promotion.
Achieved More Than Expected Results (AM) Level of Performance:  The employee consistently exceeds expectations of “Achieved Expected Results (AE)” performance requirements, continually demonstrates successful collaborations within the work environment, overcomes significant organizational challenges, and works productively and strategically with others in non-routine matters, some of which may be complex and sensitive.  The employee consistently demonstrates the highest level of integrity and accountability in achieving HHS program and management goals.
Achieved Outstanding Results (AO) Level of Performance:  The employee produces results that significantly exceed expectations and/or result in uncommon successes, are consistently superior, and/or exceed performance requirements.  Despite major challenges such as changing priorities, insufficient resources, unanticipated resource shortages, or externally-driven parameters, employee performance is a model of excellence.  Contributions impact well beyond the employee’s level of responsibility.  The employee demonstrates exceptional initiative in achieving results critical to Departmental success and strategic goals.  Products and skills create significant changes in their area of responsibility and authority.
Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR) Level of Performance:  The employee fails to achieve the successful level of performance standard in one or more critical ele­ments even though circumstances allowed for its achievement. “Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR)” performance can result in the employee’s reassignment, removal, or reduction grade.
Appraisal Cycle:  The appraisal cycle is typically twelve (12) months.
Appraisal Period:  The time period that a performance plan is in effect.
Critical Elements:  A critical element is a work assignment or responsibility of such importance that “Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR)” performance on the element would result in the determination that the employee’s overall performance is Achieved Unsatisfactory Results (UR).  All elements in the HHS performance plan are considered critical.  The performance plan has a maximum of six (6) critical elements.
Forced Distribution of Summary Ratings:  A prohibited method of distributing performance ratings by assessing an individual’s performance relative to their colleagues instead of against documented standards.
Interim Rating:  A rating that is assigned when an employee has served at least 901 days under a performance plan and changes positions during the Appraisal Period.  Position changes may be temporary (e.g. a detail or temporary promotion) or permanent.  This may happen more than once during the rating period.
Measures:  Targets or indicators of quality, quantity, timeliness, or cost effectiveness used to determine work unit and employee performance.
Minimum Period of Performance:  The minimum period of performance that must be completed before a performance rating can be prepared is 90 days.  An employee must be placed on a performance plan with critical elements assigned for a minimum of 90 days for a rating to be assigned.  In the event the performance plan is revised during the appraisal period, and a critical element is changed with less than 90 days remaining in the appraisal period, the employee’s performance may not be evaluated and a No Rating (NR) must be assigned to that element.
No Rating:  This rating is assigned to an element when the employee’s performance cannot be evaluated, typically in the case that the Minimum Period of Performance has not been met, or if the employee’s duties changed but were not reflected in the PMAP.  An NR rating does not negatively impact a summary rating or Rating of Record.
Partially Achieved Expected Results (PA):  This is the minimum level of acceptable performance for retention on the job and improvement is necessary.  The employee has difficulties in meeting expectations.  Actions taken by the employee are sometimes inappropriate or marginally effective.  Organizational goals and objectives are met only as a result of close supervision.
Performance Management Appraisal Program Coordinator:  PMAP Coordinators, identified by their respective Operating Division or Staff Division (OpDiv or StaffDiv), are performance management liaisons for the operations of the PMAP who share knowledge and best practices across HHS and provide essential advice, guidance, coordination, and support to their organization.
Performance Standards:  The written benchmarks against which performance of each element is evaluated and given a rating level.
Performance Management:  A systematic process by which an agency involves its employees, as individuals and members of a group, in improving organizational effectiveness in the accomplishment of agency mission and goals.
Progress Review:  A periodic assessment of an employee’s performance that occurs at least once during the Appraisal Period at the mid-point of the appraisal cycle.
Quality Step Increase:  An increase in the employee's rate of basic pay from one step to the next higher step of the grade.  Only an employee who receives a rating of record at “Achieved Outstanding Results (AO)” is eligible.
