
The classification of a vacant position should also be reviewed before action is taken to fill it, since this represents the best opportunity to take any corrective action required. Identical/additional positions which are filled frequently should be reviewed often to ensure their accuracy.
Desk Audits.  Desk audits to determine whether duties and responsibilities correspond to the actual job classification and salary grade are necessary for a variety of reasons, e.g., recent establishment of a new position, which may be based on projected duties; introduction of new technology affecting major duties of a position; new OPM classification standards; apparent accretion/erosion of grade controlling duties, or at the request of an employee or supervisor. Desk audits may be conducted during a classification review by the specialist responsible for classifying the position, or for individual classification actions. A background statement about the desk audit should be addressed in the evaluation statement. A desk audit does not need to be conducted for each classification action. The number and frequency of audits depend on local classification needs.  Note: If a new position is established based on projected duties, the position should be audited approximately six months after it is filled to ensure the PD accurately describes the duties that are being performed by the incumbent.
511-1-70 Position Classification Reviews
Each OpDiv/StaffDiv must establish a classification review program/plan to ensure that the classification accuracy requirements of 5 U.S.C. 5107  are met within their division. There are a wide variety of situations which could necessitate a classification review. Some indicators of the appropriate timing for such reviews include:
Most efficient organization (MEO) studies;
Changes in mission and functions;
Change in organization structures;
Realignment of duties and responsibilities; or
Other applicable circumstances.
The position classification review plan includes the specific responsibilities of the OHRO, supervisors and managers, and the types of organizational or operational events which indicate the need for classification reviews.
Post audit reviews of the classification of individual positions or organizational components can be conducted by OHROs at any time as special needs are identified by line management.
The scope of the classification reviews, as well as the frequency, should be tailored to the needs of the individual organization. A review could cover a section within a service/division/etc. or a group of services/divisions/etc., or it could comprise positions in an occupational group, e.g., technical support positions, computer-related positions, etc.
The classification of each position under review shall be evaluated and certified as correct by an official with HR authority to classify the positions involved. Desk audits are conducted and evaluation statements prepared as deemed necessary by the appropriate delegated classification authority.
Adequate OHRO records shall be maintained to reflect the completion of the classification review, to include desk audit reports, supervisory conformance checks, etc. These records are subject to review during OHR Accountability audits or other visits.
An employee whose position is changed to a lower grade based as the result of a classification review is entitled to a prompt written notice from the OHRO, specifying the effective date. The notice shall also inform the employee of:
The employee’s right to submit an appeal to HHS (if it has the authority to take the action) or to OPM;
The information which must be provided to HHS or OPM supporting the appeal;
The time limits within which the employee must file an appeal in order to establish or preserve the right to retroactive adjustment in connection with a favorable decision; and
The employee’s entitlement to grade and/or pay retention under 5 U.S.C. 53, Subpart VI , sections 5362-5363.
OHROs are required to consult with the OHR Classification Program Manager on proposed classification actions affecting 20 or more substantially similar positions, prior to effecting the decisions. (For the purposes of this paragraph, the term "positions" refers to the number of employees.) Consultation is also required if fewer than 20 substantially similar positions are directly affected and it is anticipated that the decision will have a "ripple" effect on a significant number of other positions within HHS.
511-1-80 Implementing OPM Classification Standards
New or updated classification standards and/or classification guides must be applied to covered positions within 12 months of OPM’s issuance date, or by the date designated by OPM.
The following strategies may be considered when implementing new classification standards:
Apply first to new positions and positions under classification appeal.
Apply to vacant positions prior to initiating recruitment.
Apply standards to positions where a grade change is expected.
Process mass changes, as appropriate, rather than individual personnel actions.
Make pen-and-ink changes for minor revisions with no title, series, or grade impact.
Annotate the new classification standard on the OF-8, PD coversheet, in block 22.
If an employee, in a position covered by a new/revised classification standard, files an appeal prior to the implementation of the new OPM standard, the OHRO must immediately apply the new standard so the appeal can be properly adjudicated. See Section 511-1-100 for more information on the appeals process. 
If an OpDiv/StaffDiv has a valid reason for requesting an extension, a justification, including the requested extension timeframe; the reason for the extension; the number of positions impacted by the classification standard update; and any other pertinent information should be sent to OHR for review, approval, and if warranted, OHR will send the request forward to OPM. The request must be sent within 60 calendar days of notification from OPM of the new classification standard.
