
Organizational and functional charts.
Comments from the immediate supervisor and/or higher level official relative to the accuracy of the PD and the merits of the FLSA appeal. Discrepancies or disagreements should be resolved before submitting the appeal for decision.
Copies of official time and leave/pay records for the time period claimed.
OPM claims are forwarded to: Classification and Pay Claims Program Manager, Center for Merit System Accountability, Office of Personnel Management, 1900 E Street, NW, Room 6484, Washington, DC 20415.
HHS claims are forwarded to the HHS Director of the Talent Acquisition Division, in OHR, at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov.
511-1-140 Documentation and Accountability
Records associated with actions taken under this Instruction, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule. All records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three full years. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, etc. or if the time limits associated with grievance processes have passed (e.g., before the anniversary date).
OHR will conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Exhibit A: Example Position Description/Evaluation Statement Format
Example Position Description Format* (Factor Evaluation System)

[Position Title]
GS-[Occupational Series]-[Grade]

I. Introduction

[Describe the primary purpose of the position and its location within the organization. Include a very brief overview of the Duties and Responsibilities sections. If this position is a career ladder then the paragraph must identify its relative position (i.e. entry level, full performance, etc.).]

Example:  This position is located in [Office of the Secretary, an Operating Division, or Staff Division, of the Department of Health and Human Services]. The purpose of the position is to carry out a wide variety of assignments associated with administrative efficiency and operations of the office. The incumbent must have a current knowledge of administration and Department policy with respect to the various agency programs and activities. The work of the position focuses on responsibilities performed in support of the office or senior agency official and may involve a variety of sensitive and confidential matters. Responsibilities related to administrative matters include frequent contact with subordinate agencies throughout the Department. The incumbent serves as a principal member of the office’s support staff.

II. Major Duties and Responsibilities

[In descending order of importance, describe the principal duties and responsibilities which characterize the position in plain, clear language and as specifically as possible. Avoid general terms, vague expressions, repetition, and conclusions. Describe only the major duties, responsibilities and other important aspects of the position that may affect the final classification determination. Generally, major duties are those that occupy a significant portion of the employee's time and they should be only those duties currently assigned, observable, identified with the position's purpose and mission of the organization, and expected to continue on a regular and recurring basis.]

Performs other duties as assigned. [This exact statement must be included in all PDs.]

III. Factor 1 - Knowledge Required by the Position

[Describe:

Kind or nature of knowledge and skills needed.
How the knowledge and skills are used in doing the work.]
IV. Factor 2 - Supervisory Controls

[Describe:

How the work is assigned.
Employee's responsibility for carrying out the work.
How the work is reviewed. ]
V. Factor 3 – Guidelines

[Describe:

Guidelines used for performing the work.
Judgment needed to apply the guidelines or develop new guides. ]
VI. Factor 4 – Complexity

[Describe:

Nature of the assignment.
Difficulty in identifying what needs to be done.
Difficulty and originality involved in performing the work. ]
VII. Factor 5 - Scope and Effect        

[Describe:

Purpose of the work.
Impact of the work product or service (how far-reaching is its effects). ]
VIII. Factors 6/7 - Personal Contacts/Purpose of Contacts

[Describe:

People and conditions/setting under which contacts are made.
Reasons for contacts in Factor 6.]
IX. Factor 8 - Physical Demands

[Describe:

Nature, frequency, and intensity of physical activity.]
X. Factor 9 - Work Environment      

[Describe:

Risks and discomforts caused by physical surroundings and the safety precautions necessary to avoid accidents or discomfort.]
*The FES format must be used when the classification of the position is based on a FES standard.

 


Sample Evaluation Statement for FES Format

I. Introduction

[Briefly describe why the position is being established, re-evaluated, etc.]

II. References

[Include all references used to classify the position, for example:

Introduction to the Position Classification Standards, Revised: August 2009
The Classifier’s Handbook, August 1991
Administrative Work in the Human Resources Management Group, GS-0200 December 2000]
III. Pay Plan, Series, and Title Determination

[Describe how the pay plan, series, and title were determined, utilizing references from paragraph II above.]

IV. Grade Determination

[Refer to the standard used to evaluate the position and describe how the position FULLY meets the factor levels described in the Standard (i.e., if the factor level(s) require additional explanation, provide the rationale for assigning the factor level(s) that was credited.]

V. Conclusion

[State the classification determination, based on the above evaluation.]

 

Example Position Description (Narrative Format)

[Position Title]
GS-[Occupational Series]-[Grade]

I. Introduction

[Describe the primary purpose of the position and its location within the organization. Include a very brief overview of the Duties and Responsibilities sections. If this position is a career ladder then the paragraph must identify its relative position (i.e. entry level, full performance, etc.).]

Example:  This position is located in [Office of the Secretary, an Operating Division, or Staff Division] of the Department of Health and Human Services.  The purpose of the position is to carry out a wide variety of assignments associated with administrative efficiency and operations of the office. The incumbent must have a current knowledge of administration and Department policy with respect to the various agency programs and activities. The work of the position focuses on responsibilities performed in support of the office or senior agency official and may involve a variety of sensitive and confidential matters. Responsibilities related to administrative matters include frequent contact with subordinate agencies throughout the Department. The incumbent serves as a principal member of the office’s support staff.

II. Nature of Assignment

[In descending order of importance, describe the principal duties and responsibilities which characterize the position, describing them in plain, clear language and as specifically as possible. Avoid general terms, vague expressions, repetition, and conclusions. Describe only the major duties and other important aspects of the position that may affect the final classification determination. Generally, major duties are those that occupy a significant portion of the employee's time and they should be only those duties currently assigned, observable, identified with the position's purpose and mission of the organization, and expected to continue on a regular and recurring basis.]

Performs other duties as assigned. [This exact statement must be included on all PDs.]

III. Level of Responsibility    

[Describe:

Kind or nature of knowledge and skills needed.
How the knowledge and skills are used in doing the work.
Level of responsibility given in decision-making.
Guidelines used to perform the work.
How work is assigned.]
 
