511-1-40 Responsibilities
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources (DASHR), Office of Human Resources (OHR):
Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding position classification in accordance with HHS and OPM policy, procedures, and guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Makes determinations on all classification appeals submitted to HHS, in accordance with regulatory requirements.
Makes determinations on FLSA claims filed with HHS.
Reviews and submits any Administrative Law Judge classification issues identified by Operating and Staff Divisions (OpDiv/StaffDivs) to OPM for action.
Periodically reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv position classification programs.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resources Offices (OHROs):
Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy, procedures guidance and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Ensure GS and FWS positions are accurately classified in accordance with published OPM position classification standards by creating PDs which clearly distinguish each position's appropriate title, series, and grade.
Ensure assignments reflect application of sound position management principles, including organizing work in an efficient, effective manner and using resources economically to carry out the missions of their organizations.
Establish a classification review program and regularly review its OpDiv/StaffDiv position descriptions to ensure accuracy.
Adhere to HHS Instruction 511-3, Noncompetitive Promotion Based on Reclassification or Accretion of Duties, when considering exceptions to the merit promotion procedures.
Obtain written concurrence from the Office of General Counsel (OGC) prior to classifying Attorney, GS-0905, positions outside of OGC.
Obtain written concurrence from the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs (ASPA) prior to classifying Public Affairs Specialists, GS-1035-14 and above, positions.
Obtain written concurrence from the Office of the Inspector General prior to classifying Criminal Investigator, GS-1811, positions.
Ensure employees have copies of their PDs and objectively, expeditiously, and fairly consider employee concerns regarding the accuracy of their PDs, the classification of their positions, and classification appeals.
Submits supplemental information to OHR for classification appeals to HHS; notifies the HHS OHR Classification Manager immediately upon knowledge of an employee’s classification appeal to OPM; and provides OHR a copy of OPM’s decision, as applicable.
Makes FLSA determinations at the time of classification, and forwards FLSA claims filed with HHS, along with supplemental information, to OHR for decision.
511-1-50 Position Management
By law, agencies are given the authority and responsibility to establish, classify, and manage their own positions. Supervisors and managers play major roles in the management and classification of subordinate positions. As a result, they are responsible for assuring a sound position structure in the organizations they lead to ensure the effective use of limited financial and personnel resources. 
Good position management can be defined as a carefully designed position structure which blends the skills and assignments of employees in order to successfully carry out the organization's mission or program while maintaining a cost-effective operation. 
Sound position management reflects a logical balance between the employees needed to carry out the major functions of the organizational unit and those needed to provide adequate support; between professional employees and technicians; between fully trained employees and trainees; and between supervisors and subordinates.
Good position management also requires consideration of grade levels of the positions involved. Grades should be commensurate with the work performed to accomplish the organization's mission and should not exceed those grades needed to perform the work of the unit. A carefully designed position structure results in reasonable and supportable grade levels.
In accordance with 5 CFR 335.103 and HHS Instruction 511-3, Noncompetitive Promotion Based on Reclassification or Accretion of Duties, HRDs may exclude certain promotions from the competitive procedures in very specific circumstances (i.e., the reclassification of a position without significant change in the duties and responsibilities due to issuance of a new classification standard or the correction of an initial classification error, or accretion of duties due to the addition of substantive higher graded responsibilities). Such actions should be rare and used only in situations where a strong basis for an exception to the competitive promotion process exists. Competitive procedures must be followed when these circumstances are not explicitly met and documented.
While there is no supervisor to employee ratio required by OPM, supervisors must perform supervisory duties at least 25% of their time. Supervisory duties are defined in the General Schedule Supervisory Guide (GSSG) - PDF. OpDiv/StaffDivs must determine the appropriate ratio of managerial and supervisory positions to non-supervisory workers and prevent the excessive layering of supervision and unwarranted use of support positions. The appropriate ratio of professional, technical, clerical and wage positions consistent with the proportion of such work occurring in the organization must also be decided.
511-1-60 Position Descriptions
PD.  OHROs are responsible to ensure jobs are accurately classified in accordance with published OPM position classification standards by creating PDs - or utilizing standardized positions descriptions when available - which clearly distinguish each position's appropriate title, series, and grade.

