

Exhibit C: HHS Fair Labor Standards Act Classifier Checklist
HHS FLSA Classifier Checklist

Complete this form for each grade in a career ladder. Note: it is possible for different grades within a career ladder to have different FLSA designations (for example, non-exempt at lower grades; or the work is procedural in nature; and exempt at higher grades in the career ladder requiring more analytical skills to complete the tasks). A completed and signed checklist must be attached to each classified position description and statement of difference (if applicable).

Instructions: Complete the fields below and check the criteria applicable to the position:

A.  REQUIRED POSITION INFORMATION

Position Title:                                     Pay Plan:  Series: 0123 Grade: 01

Position Number:              Office/Organization:      

Administrative Code:       Job Code:      

B.  NON-EXEMPT CRITERIA

Salary-based non-exemption (5 C.F.R. 551.203)

[   ] Employee annual rate of basic pay is less than $23,660.
Non-exemption of certain employees (5 C.F.R. 551.204)

[   ] Position is non-supervisory and engaged in equipment operation, or is a protective or clerical occupation.

[   ] Position involves technician work properly classified at the GS-09 level or below.

[   ] Position is nonsupervisory in the Federal Wage System or other comparable wage system.
C.  EXEMPTION CRITERIA

Executive Exemption Criteria (5 C.F.R. 551.205)

[   ] Primary duty of the position is management or supervision; work involves customarily and regularly directing the work of subordinates and has the authority to hire, remove, or evaluate performance as well as make recommendations on employment issues that are given particular weight by higher-level supervisors or managers.
Administrative Exemption Criteria (5 C.F.R. 551.206)

[   ] Primary duty is performance of office or non-manual work directly related to the management or general business functions. The work involves the exercise of discretion and independent judgment with respect to matters of significance.
Professional Exemption Criteria (5 C.F.R. 551.207)

[   ] Learned Professionals (5 C.F.R. 551.208): Primary duty is performance of work requiring advanced knowledge in a field of science or learning including the traditional professions of law, medicine, theology, accounting, actuarial computation, engineering, architecture, teaching, pharmacy, various types of physical, chemical and biological sciences, and other similar occupations that have a recognized professional status; entrance into these professions requires a prolonged course of specialized intellectual instruction.

[   ] Creative Professionals (5 C.F.R. 551.209): Primary duty is performance of work requiring invention, imagination, originality or talent in a recognized field of artistic or creative endeavor such as music, acting, writing, and the graphic arts. Exemption depends upon the extent of invention, imagination, originality or talent of the employee; exemption does not apply to work that can be produced by a person with general manual or intellectual ability and training.

[   ] Computer Employees (5 C.F.R. 551.210): Primary duty consists of the application of systems analysis techniques and procedures, including consulting with users to determine hardware, software or system functions specifications; OR design development, documentation, analysis, creation, testing or modification of computer systems or programs; OR a combination of these duties. Exemption does not apply to employees engaged in the manufacture or repair of computer hardware and related equipment or to those whose work is highly reliant on computers but whose duties do not consist of the aforementioned. Salary based exemption applies to any computer professional compensated on an hourly bases at a rate of basic pay of $27.63 an hour and above.
Temporary Duties (5 C.F.R. 551.211):

[   ] Performing different work or duties for a temporary period of time may affect an employee's exemption status. Consult 5 C.F.R. 551.211 for more details and explain in remarks below.
Foreign Exemption Criteria (5 C.F.R. 551.212)

[   ] Employees permanently stationed in an exempt area and spend all hours of work in a given work week in one or more exempt areas or employees not permanently stationed in an exempt area, but spend all hours of work in a given work week in one or more exempt areas. Exempt area means any foreign country, or any territory under the jurisdiction of the United States other than a State; the District of Columbia; Puerto Rico; the U.S. Virgin Islands; American Samoa; Guam; Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands; Midway Atoll; Wake Island; Johnston Island; and Palmyra (5 C.F.R.104).
Criminal Investigators Receiving Availability Pay (5 C.F.R. 551.213(a))

[   ] Special exemption/exclusion applies to criminal investigators receiving availability pay.
Law Enforcement Activities (5 C.F.R. 551.216)

[   ] Certain duties performed by law enforcement officers affect FLSA status.  Consult 5 CFR 551.216 for more details and explain in remarks below.
Final Determination (check one):     [   ] Non-Exempt                      [   ] Exempt

HR Specialist:                                      Date:

Signature __________________________________________

Remarks: