Instruction 511-1: Position Classification
Issuance Date:
May 16, 2018

Material Transmitted:
HHS Instruction 511-1, Position Classification, dated 05/16/2018

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 511-1, Position Classification, dated February 15, 2013.

Background:
This Instruction has been revised to clarify the roles in the classification appeals process, provide guidance on position management and classification reviews, and address the Fair Labor Standards Act. 

This issuance is effective immediately and must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/

Christine M. Major
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Chief Human Capital Officer

511-1-00: Purpose
This Instruction outlines the policies, requirements, and responsibilities for administering the Department’s position classification, job grading, and position management programs, consistent with federal law, regulations, and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) guidance.

511-1-10: References
5 U.S.C., Chapter 51, Classification 
5 U.S.C., Chapter 53, Pay Rates and Systems 
5 C.F.R. § 511, Subpart F, Classification Appeals
5 C.F.R. § 511, Subpart G, Effective Dates of Position Classification Actions or Decisions   
5 C.F.R. § 532, Subparts F, Job Grading System
5 C.F.R. § 532, Subpart G, Job Grading Reviews and Appeals
5 C.F.R. § 551, Subpart G, FLSA Claims and Compliance 
OPM Handbook of Occupational Groups and Families, May 2009 - PDF
Introduction to the Position Classification Standards, August 2009 - PDF
The Classifier’s Handbook, August 1991 - PDF
General Schedule Supervisory Guide, April 1998 - PDF
Federal Wage System Job Grading System, September 1981 - PDF
Federal Wage System Job Grading Standard for Supervisors, December 1992 - PDF
HHS Instruction 511-2, Use of Career Ladder Positions, December 2008 - PDF
HHS Instruction 511-3, Non-competitive Promotion Based on Reclassification (Accretion of Duties), October 2011 - PDF
511-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage.  All HHS General Schedule (GS) and Federal Wage System (FWS) positions subject to the provisions of 5 C.F.R. §§ 511 and 532.
Exclusions.
Senior Executive Service (SES), Scientific and Professional (ST), Senior-Level (SL) positions
Positions covered by authorities specifically exempt from 5 U.S.C. Chapter 51 , Classification
Bargaining Unit Employees. The provisions of this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. § Chapter 71 . Therefore, when the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
511-1-30 Definitions
Appellant. An employee who has submitted a classification appeal.
Classification Appeal. A classification appeal is a written petition from an employee, or his/her written designated representative, for a change in the classification of his/her current position of record.
Classification Appeal Decision. A classification appeal decision is the written determination and justification of HHS’s or OPM’s final classification of an appealed position.
Desk Audit.  An evaluation of a particular position to determine whether duties and responsibilities correspond to the actual job classification and salary grade. An employee or supervisor can request a desk audit, or they may be conducted as part of a position classification review program.
Employee Representative. An employee may designate a representative of his/her choice to assist in the preparation and presentation of a classification appeal. The representative is free from restraint, interference, coercion, or reprisal for performing representative duties.
Federal Wage System. A classification and pay system that covers appropriated fund and nonappropriated fund employees who are paid by the hour and work in trades, craft, and labor occupations.
FLSA Exempt Employee. One who is not covered by the minimum wage and overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA or Act).
FLSA Nonexempt Employee. One who is covered by the minimum wage and overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA or Act).
Grade. The numerical designation, GS−1 through GS−15, which identifies the range of difficulty and responsibility, and level of qualification requirements of positions included in the General Schedule.
General Schedule.  A classification and pay system covering the majority of civilian federal employees in professional technical, administrative, and clerical positions. 
Job Family. A broad grouping of trades, craft, and labor occupations related by similar functions; materials or equipment used; or knowledge and skills required.
Position Description (PD). A PD documents the major duties and responsibilities of a position assigned by management.
Occupational Group.  A major category of white-collar occupations, covering a group of associated or closely related occupations in the General Schedule (e.g., the Accounting and Budget Group, GS−500; the Engineering and Architecture Group, GS−800; the General Administrative, Clerical, and Office Services Group, GS−300, etc.).
Series.  A subdivision of an occupational group or job family consisting of positions with similar specialized line of work and qualification requirements, and identified by a position title and number (series).
