
511-1-90 Classification of Special Series
GS-905 Attorney Positions, all grade levels
Attorney positions may not be established outside of the Office of the General Counsel (OGC) without the concurrence of OGC. (Note: In the Food and Drug Administration, the Office of Chief Counsel reports to the OGC’s Food and Drug Division and seeks approval directly from the OGC.  However, all other FDA Centers/Offices outside the OGC’s Food and Drug Division must obtain written approval from OGC to establish a new attorney position.) 
To request establishment of a new Attorney, GS-0905, position:
The OHRO conducts a preliminary review of the draft PD to ascertain if the position meets the series definition for an attorney and is properly classified to the GS-0905 series.
Once the OHRO approves the classification of the position,  a designated OpDiv/StaffDiv official submits the following information to the HHS OHR, Classification Program Manager at employmentpolicy@hhs.gov:
Signed cover memorandum endorsing the request and requesting OGC’s review and approval;
A justification that describes the need for the position; and
A draft PD signed by the requesting authority.
HHS OHR/Talent Acquisition Division (TAD) reviews and submits the information to OGC for concurrence.
OGC has 30 calendar days to review the request and concur in writing or deny the request with a written explanation. 
OGC returns the approved or denied PD to TAD for record keeping purposes and TAD returns the PD to the OpDiv/StaffDiv requestor. 
All documentation, including OGC concurrence must be attached to the final PD and maintained with the HRO for future reference as long as the PD remains active.
If an approved position is vacated and the PD and organization remains the same, HHS OHR and OGC do not need to review the position again. The OpDiv/StaffDiv has the authority to backfill the position without additional approval.
For more information, see HHS OHR Attorney Guidance – Classification, Qualifications, and Recruitment, TAD-002-2017.
GS-1035, Public Affairs Positions at the GS-14 level and above:
Public Affairs positions at the GS-1035-14 level and above may not be established outside of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs (ASPA) without the concurrence of ASPA.
Requests are submitted to the HHS OHR Classification Manager, then reviewed and forwarded to ASPA for approval following the same procedures and requirements outlined for Attorney positions above.
GS-1811 Criminal Investigator Positions, all grade levels
Criminal Investigator, GS-1811, positions may not be established outside of the Office of the Inspector General (OIG) without the concurrence of the OIG.
Requests are submitted to the HHS OHR Classification Manager, then reviewed and forwarded to OIG for approval following the same procedures and requirements outlined for Attorney positions above.
GS-0935 Administrative Law Judge Positions. OPM retains the authority to establish all Administrative Law Judge positions, see https://www.opm.gov/services-for-agencies/administrative-law-judges/ .
511-1-100 Classification Appeals
In all cases, OHR serves as the adjudicating organization for all HHS classification appeals. Consistent with the Introduction to Position Classification Standards - PDF and 5 C.F.R. § 532.703(b)(7), agency classification appeal decisions are made one administrative level above the classification authority which classified the position(s).
An employee who is dissatisfied with the classification of their position should first discuss their concerns/issues with their immediate supervisor. If the supervisor is unable to resolve the issue to the employee's satisfaction, the employee should discuss their dissatisfaction with their servicing OHRO.
Current federal employees have the right to appeal the classification of their position based on grade, occupational series, or title of the position (see 5 C.F.R. § 511.607 for a complete description of non-appealable issues). Employees may also seek to have a GS position changed to the Federal Wage System (FWS) or a FWS position changed to the GS.
Employees covered under the General Schedule (5 C.F.R. Part 511) have the options of:
Appealing the occupational series, grade or title of the job to the HHS, Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA), OHR; or
Appealing directly to OPM. (OHR shall be notified immediately upon knowledge of an employee's classification appeal to OPM.)
Employees who elect to appeal first to HHS may subsequently appeal to OPM if they are dissatisfied with the Department's appeal decision. However, employees may not appeal to HHS if they have previously appealed the same position to OPM. 
If an employee had previously filed a similar appeal to HHS on which a decision is pending, then appeals to OPM, the Department appeal is canceled and all parties notified by OHR.
If a GS employee is appealing an HHS decision or OPM classification certificate issued under 5 U.S.C. §§ 5103  or 5110, and has suffered a loss in grade  or pay , is not entitled to retained grade  or pay , and desires retroactive adjustments, the time limits in 5 C.F.R. § 511.703 must be observed. In order for the decision to be made retroactive, the employee must file the initial request for review with either HHS or OPM not later than 15 calendar days  after the effective date  of the reclassification action. If the appellate’ s decision raises the grade  of the position  above the original grade , retroactivity applies only to the extent of restoration to the original grade .
Employees covered under the Federal Wage System (5 C.F.R. Part 532) must:
First appeal to HHS/OHR. (FWS employees cannot appeal directly to OPM without appealing to their agency first.)
If the employee is dissatisfied with the decision of HHS, they may file an appeal with OPM, provided they do so within 15 calendar days of receipt of HHS’ decision. 
When an appeal involves a change to lower grade level or other job-grading action which resulted in a reduction in grade or loss of pay, in order to be entitled to a retroactive corrective action, and employee must request a review within 15 calendar days of the effective date of the change to lower grade (5 C.F.R. § 532.703(b)(3)). 
Employees may select a representative as outlined for GS employees under 5 C.F.R. § 511.608, and for FWS employees under 5 C.F.R. § 532.703(b)(4). Employees may have a representative (designated in writing) to help prepare and submit the appeal case, but the representative cannot be someone with management or classification authority over the position. When an OpDiv/StaffDiv disallows an employee's selected representative, the OHRO must notify the employee in writing and explain the reason(s).
OHR’s letter of decision constitutes a final decision within HHS. A classification appeal decision may be reopened and reconsidered by OHR when the employee presents material facts not previously considered.
An appeal decision by the Department or OPM can result in the appealed position's grade being raised, lowered, or sustained. The position's pay plan, title, series, or grade may be changed or sustained. Employees are advised by the appropriate OHRO of the effect an appeal decision has on the classification of the position and any other employees assigned to the same position.