
Example Evaluation Statement (Narrative Format)

I. Introduction

[Briefly describe why the position is being established, re-evaluated, etc.]

II. References

[Include all references used to classify the position, for example:

Introduction to the Position Classification Standards, Revised: August 2009
The Classifier’s Handbook, August 1991
Administrative Work in the Human Resources Management Group, GS-0200 December 2000
III. Pay Plan, Series, and Title Determination

[Describe how the pay plan, series, and title were determined, utilizing references from paragraph II above.]

IV. Grade Determination

[Refer to the standard used to evaluate the position and describe how the position FULLY meets the factor levels described in the Standard (i.e., if the factor level(s) require additional explanation, provide the rationale for assigning the factor level(s) that was credited.]

V. Conclusion

[State the classification determination, based on the above evaluation.]

Exhibit B: FLSA Status Determination Questionnaire for Managers and Supervisors
Fair Labor Standards Act Status Determination Questionnaire for Managers and Supervisors

Employee: [Joe Donuts]

Position Title: [       ] Pay Plan: [       ]    Series [0123]    Grade [09]    PD # [12345]

Office: [Office of Self Employment]

Employment Status: [Full-Time]           Work Schedule: [8 hour]

Supervisor: [       ]                        Contact Number: [123-456-7890]

Purpose: This questionnaire is for managers and supervisors to assist Classifiers in determining whether or not the named employee should be coded as exempt or non-exempt from the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). The provisions of the FLSA apply to employees coded as non-exempt. The FLSA status of the employee is often the key to deciding whether certain duties are compensable as "hours of work" and as to the rate of pay the employee should be compensated. Overtime entitlements also depend on this status, as may compensation for travel time. It is assumed that all federal employees are covered by the FLSA (Non-Exempt) unless they clearly fall under one of the following exemptions. Job titles and official PDs do not determine an employee’s status, rather it is the duties that the employee actually performs on a regular and recurring basis that serve as the determining factor. Please provide detailed explanation in the spaces provided for all “Yes” answers.

Yes [   ] No [   ]

Is the employee a supervisor or manager? (regularly directs two or more employees, and has the authority to hire or fire (or the employee's recommendations as to the hiring, firing, advancement, promotion, or any other change of status of other employees, are given particular weight))?

If yes, list examples of duties to support this:
Yes [   ] No [   ]

Does the employee exercise discretion and independent judgment with respect to matters of significance while performing office or non-manual work directly related to the agency's management or general business operations? (The exercise of discretion and independent judgment involves the comparison and the evaluation of possible courses of conduct, and acting or making a decision after the various possibilities have been considered.  Employees who simply apply well-established techniques or procedures described in manuals or other sources within closely prescribed limits to determine the correct response to an inquiry or set of circumstances are nonexempt. The term “matters of significance” refers to the level of importance or consequence of the work performed. Some examples: Employee has authority to commit the employer in matters that have significant financial impact; has authority to waive or deviate from established policies and procedures without prior approval; has authority to negotiate and bind the organization on significant matters.)

If yes, list examples of duties to support this:
Yes  [   ] No [   ]

Does the employee's primary duties require advanced knowledge in a field of science or learning customarily acquired by a prolonged course of specialized instruction? The work must include the following three elements:
The employee must perform work requiring advanced knowledge (predominantly intellectual in character and including work requiring the consistent exercise of discretion and judgment). Advanced knowledge cannot be attained at the high school level;
The advanced knowledge must be in a field of science or learning which includes the traditional professions of law, medicine, theology, accounting, actuarial computation, engineering, architecture, teaching, various types of physical, chemical and biological sciences, pharmacy, and other similar occupations that have a recognized professional status;
The advanced knowledge must be customarily acquired by a prolonged course of specialized instruction in a field where specialized academic training is a standard prerequisite for entrance into the profession – to address this element, please identify specifically the type and level of specialized instruction required for the position.
If yes, list examples of duties to support this:
Yes [   ] No [   ]

Is the employee's primary duty in the performance of work requiring invention, imagination, originality, or talent in a recognized field of artistic or creative endeavor? The work performed must be "in a recognized field of artistic or creative endeavor," including such fields as music, writing, acting, and the graphic arts. Employees engaged in the work of newspapers, magazines, television, or other media are not exempt creative professionals if they only collect, organize, and record information that is routine or already public, or if they do not contribute a unique interpretation or analysis to a news product.

If yes, list examples of duties to support this:
Yes [   ] No [   ]

Is the employee a skilled worker in the computer field? The exemption for employees in computer occupations does not include employees engaged in the manufacture or repair of computer hardware and related equipment. Rather, the exemption applies to computer employees whose primary duties consist of:
 

The application of systems analysis techniques and procedures, including consulting with users, to determine hardware, software or system functional specifications;
The design, development, documentation, analysis, creation, testing or modification of computer systems or programs, including prototypes, based on and related to user or system design specifications;
The design, documentation, testing, creation or modification of computer programs related to machine operating systems;
A combination of the above, requiring the same level of skills.
If yes, list examples of duties to support this:
Supervisor’s Signature ______________________ Date:


