
Appeal Decisions
The appeal decision is provided in writing to the employee. A final decision by HHS or OPM constitutes a certificate which is mandatory and binding on all administrative, certifying, payroll, disbursing, and accounting officials of the Government.
Classification appeal decisions are implemented according to the provision(s) of 5 C.F.R. § 511.702 and 5 C.F.R. § 532.705 (a)(d).
511-1-120 Fair Labor Standards Act Determinations
The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) sets minimum standards for wage and overtime entitlements and administrative procedures for which covered worktime must be compensated. All employees are covered by the Act, except for those listed under 5 C.F.R. 551.103.
All positions within the federal government must be designated as either “exempt” or “nonexempt” under the FLSA criteria identified in 5 C.F.R. 551. The exempt or nonexempt status of the position are identified as part of the employee's PD and annotated in block 7 of the OF-8.
Employees are presumed to be FLSA “nonexempt” unless a determination is made the employee clearly meets one or more of the exemption criteria as specified in 5 C.F.R. Part 551, Subpart B, and supplemental guidance issued by OPM. If the employee clearly meets the criteria for exemption, the FLSA “exempt” designation must be documented.
An exempt or nonexempt determination shall be made at the time of classification for each employee assigned to a position based on a comparison of the employee's actual duties performed with the exemption criteria outlined in OPM and Department of Labor guidelines. While official PDs and titles may assist in making initial FLSA exemption determinations, the designation of an employee as FLSA exempt or nonexempt must ultimately rest on the duties actually performed by the employee.
The exempt or nonexempt status of a position should be reviewed when it is established, redescribed, and classified based on significant changes in assigned duties, or in connection with a classification review.
If the exempt or nonexempt determination of an employee is inconsistent with the duties and responsibilities assigned in the official PD, it is necessary to either revise the PD, or ensure that the employee performs the duties and responsibilities as assigned in the PD.
For unencumbered positions, an initial determination must be made based on a comparison of the projected duties and responsibilities as assigned in the official PD with the exemption criteria. 
When making an FLSA determination, the OHRO must not presume a nonexempt or exempt status based on grade. Not all positions graded at GS-9 and below are nonexempt. While this can be used as a guide, HR specialists must analyze the duties and responsibilities for each determination.
In general, executive, administrative and professional employees, as well as employees performing a combination of exempt duties, are exempt from FLSA regulations.  However, this must be narrowly applied only to employees who are clearly within the terms and spirit of the exemption criteria. 
The supervisor is responsible for reviewing an employee’s duties and responsibilities and filling out the “FLSA Status Determination Questionnaire for Managers and Supervisors” (Exhibit B) and submitting it with the PD to the OHRO.
The OHRO must fill out the HHS FLSA Classifier Checklist (Exhibit C) and attach it to the official position description. The burden of proof as to the exempt or nonexempt status of an employee rests with the Department, not the employee. If the determination is not self-evident, the basis for the decision should be retained with the PD either as part of the evaluation report or as a separate document.
511-1-130 FLSA Claims
Note: OpDivs/StaffDivs should review their local or national collective bargaining agreement for specifically negotiated items or processes.

Employees who are dissatisfied with the FLSA coverage determination of their positions have the right to appeal the decision. It is recommended by OPM the employee first talk to their supervisor and/or OHRO to discuss their concerns about their FLSA determination.
Bargaining unit covered employees are required to use the negotiated grievance process and may not file an administrative FLSA claim with either HHS or OPM unless expressly excluded from the bargaining agreement.
Non-bargaining unit covered employees may file an FLSA claim either with HHS or with OPM; however, the same claim may not be pursued with both HHS and OPM at the same time. Employees who elect to submit a claim first to HHS may subsequently submit a claim to OPM if they are dissatisfied with the Department's decision. However, employees may not file with HHS if they have previously submitted the same claim to OPM. You may not file a claim with HHS after receiving an unfavorable decision from OPM. An OPM decision on a claim is final and is not subject to further administrative review.
All employees have the right to bring an action in an appropriate United States court. Filing a claim with HHS or with OPM does not stop the statute of limitations from running. OPM will not decide a claim that is in litigation.
In accordance with 5 C.F.R. § 551.702, all FLSA pay claims filed after June 30, 1994, are subject to a two-year statute of limitations (three years for willful violations). An employee must submit a written claim to either the employing agency or to OPM in order to preserve the claim period. The date the agency or OPM receives the claim is the date that determines the period of possible back pay entitlement.
Under 5 C.F.R. § 551.104, “willful violation” means a violation in circumstances where the agency knew that its conduct was prohibited by the Act or showed reckless disregard of the requirements of the Act. All of the facts and circumstances surrounding the violation are taken into account in determining whether a violation was willful.
A FLSA claim to HHS or to OPM must be in writing and submitted through the OHRO to HHS/OHR. The OHRO will forward the complete appeal package within 15 days of receipt. Failure to submit an appeal through the appropriate channels may result in a delay in the decision.
The following information shall be submitted by the employees:
A signed statement that the employee wishes to appeal the FLSA determination of his/her position;
Name of local facility;
Organization to which assigned;
Current position title, series, and grade;
The requested FLSA determination;
A description of the nature of the claim and the specific issues or incidents giving rise to the claim, including the time period covered by the claim;
Evidence available which supports the claim, including the identity, commercial telephone number, and location of other individuals who may be able to provide information relating to the claim;
A written designation of third party representation, if applicable. The designation must include the name, address and phone number of the representative.
Evidence, if available, that the claim period was preserved in accordance with the time limits in 5 C.F.R. § 551.702. The date HHS or OPM received the claim, whichever is earlier, becomes the date the claim period is preserved;
A statement as to whether the employee was or was not a member of a collective bargaining unit at any time during the claim period;
If the employee was a member of a bargaining unit, a statement that he/she was or was not covered by a negotiated grievance procedure at any time during the claim period, and if covered, whether that procedure specifically excluded the claim from the scope of the negotiated grievance procedure; and
A statement that the employee has not filed an action in an appropriate United States court.
The following information shall be submitted by the OHRO along with the material supplied by the appellant:
A current, accurate PD (agreed to by all levels of management) which meets standards of adequacy and which is consistent with the position evaluation report, FLSA evaluation report, and the supervisor's comments.
A position evaluation report which includes an in-depth comparison of the duties and responsibilities with published FLSA criteria. If the report was prepared prior to the appeal, it should be updated to cover salient points raised by the appellant that may not have been previously evaluated.