
An accurate and current statement of the major duties, responsibilities, and supervisory relationships must be developed and maintained for each position covered by this Instruction. The PD of each position must be kept up to date and include information about the job which is significant to its classification.
Non-supervisory GS positions.  In order to maintain uniformity throughout HHS, PDs for non-supervisory positions shall be prepared in either the narrative or factor evaluation system (FES) format as appropriate. The FES format must be used when the classification of the position is based on a FES standard.
Non-supervisory FWS positions. FWS positions are classified using the FWS Job Grading System - PDF to determine the occupational series, title, grade, and pay system for positions performing trades, craft, and labor work. See Classifying Federal Wage System Positions for more details.
Supervisory Positions. All first and second level supervisory positions must be described in the supervisory format, which will facilitate comparison with OPM’s General Schedule Supervisory Guide (GSSG) - PDF or FWS Job Grading Standard for Supervisors - PDF, as appropriate.
Evaluation Statement. An evaluation statement is a written record of the rationale used to classify and grade a position. Evaluation statements are designed to provide consistency and continuity in classification and grading decisions. Extensive statements are required when the evaluation of the factor is not self-evident by reference to the appropriate standard.
Narrative Evaluation Statements. The length, in-depth discussion, and format of an evaluation statement should be tailored to the individual classification decision. The evaluation statement should include a concise, but thorough comparison of the grade-controlling duties and responsibilities consistent with the classification standard(s) used to evaluate the position. It should show how the assignment meets, exceeds, or falls short of the various classification elements and factors in the standard. Exhibit A provides an example narrative evaluation statement format.
FES Evaluation Statements. For positions classified by reference to a FES standard, the level and point values for each factor and the GS grade must be shown on the FES form in the Evaluation Statement. Exhibit A provides an example FES evaluation statement format.
Career Ladder Positions. For positions that are identified as career ladders, OpDivs/StaffDivs may choose to write a Statement of Difference that clearly defines the significant differences of a developmental position, or may write a complete PD for each grade level. A Statement of Difference should be used for no more than two grade levels below an official full performance level PD.
Each career ladder position should clearly define significant differences in assigned duties and responsibilities and supervisory relationships from the full performance position.
Each PD must contain sufficient information to support a valid classification action and permit the development of relevant performance standards. Whenever substantial revisions are made to the full performance position, the career ladder PDs/Statement of Difference(s) must be reviewed for potential changes.
An official classified PD includes:
A certified Optional Form (OF)-8 - PDF, as a PD coversheet, signed by the immediate supervisor and the HR Classifier, at a minimum;
PD (see Exhibit A for samples);
An evaluation statement with applicable OPM references used to classify a position (see Exhibit A for samples);
Employee bargaining unit status form, as applicable
A Position Sensitivity Designation form (PDAT), signed by the supervisor confirming accuracy of employee’s duties/responsibilities;
A completed “FLSA Status Determination Questionnaire for Managers and Supervisors” properly completed and signed by the first line supervisor (Exhibit B); and
A completed “HHS FLSA Classifier Checklist” properly completed and signed by the Classifier (Exhibit C).
The original copy of the classified PD is maintained by the OHRO. Copies of the official description shall be provided to the organization and to each employee assigned to the position. Supervisors are responsible for assuring employees are given a copy of their current PD.
PD Review.  OpDiv/StaffDivs should review all PDs under their jurisdiction bi-annually to ensure that they are current and accurate. This review shall include a review of the position sensitivity designation; bargaining unit status; and FLSA Status Determination Questionnaire for Managers and Supervisors, in consultation with the OHRO.
