531-1
Material Transmitted:

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 531-1, Setting Pay Based on Superior Qualifications and Special Needs, dated December 10, 2010.

Material Superseded:

This Instruction supersedes a HHS Transmittal issued on September 7, 2007 which deleted HHS Instruction 338-2, Appointments Above the Minimum Rate Because of Superior Qualifications, issued January 30, 1996 and January 30, 1998, in its entirety.

Background:

In September 2007, HHS deleted the existing HHS Instruction regarding setting pay at rates above step one (1) of the General Schedule based on superior qualifications and/or a special need.  The HHS Instruction was deleted because the Instruction no longer complied with the regulatory requirements in 5 CFR 531.212 – Superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority.

This instruction provides guidance to Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions on criteria for setting pay for General Schedule employees at rates above step one (1) based on candidates’ superior qualifications and/or because candidates meet a special need of the agency.  Throughout the instruction, the use of the term OPDIV refers to both Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions.

This issuance is effective immediately.  Implementation under this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Department policy.


						Denise L. Wells
						Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources


INSTRUCTION 531-1

 
SUBJECT:	SETTING PAY BASED ON SUPERIOR QUALIFICATIONS AND SPECIAL NEEDS

531-1-00	Purpose
531-1-10	References
531-1-20	Coverage and Exclusions
531-1-30	Responsibilities
531-1-40	General Policy
531-1-50	Delegation of Authority 
531-1-60	Procedures
531-1-70	Documentation and Accountability

531-1-00	PURPOSE

This Instruction outlines the requirements for setting basic pay at rates above the minimum rate for a given grade level if a candidate has superior qualifications and/or fills a special agency need. 

531-1-10         REFERENCES

A.	5 USC, § 5333 (Minimum rate for new appointments)
B.	5 CFR, § 531.212 (Superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority)

531-1-20	COVERAGE AND EXCLUSIONS

A.	Coverage
	This policy covers General Schedule (GS) employees.  

	The superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority may be used for –

1.	A first appointment (regardless of tenure) as a civilian employee of the Federal Government; or
2.	A reappointment that is considered a new appointment under the following conditions:
a.	When an employee has had a break in service of at least 90 days from the last period of civilian employment with the Federal Government; or
b.	When employment with the Federal Government during the 90-day period immediately preceding the appointment was limited to one or more of the following:
i.	Employment under a time-limited appointment in the competitive or excepted service;
ii.	Employment under an appointment as an expert or consultant under 5 U.S.C. 3109 and 5 CFR part 304;
iii.	Employment under a provisional appointment designated under 5 CFR 316.403;
iv.	Employment under a non-permanent appointment (excluding a Schedule C appointment under 5 CFR part 213) in the competitive or excepted service; and/or,
v.	Employment under the Student Career Experience Program under 5 CFR 213.3202(b).

Note: The appointment of a former member of a uniformed service (including the Commissioned Corps of the Public Health Service) as a first time Federal civilian is considered a new appointment for the purpose of this Instruction.  This is true without regard to the length of time between the former member’s exit from the uniformed service and his or her appointment as a civilian employee to include those who may be appointed to a civilian position while on terminal leave pending retirement from the uniformed service.

B.	Exclusions
	This policy does not apply to employees whose pay plan is other than GS.  HHS Instruction 532-1, Pay Setting – Federal Wage System (FWS), contains information regarding similar provisions for employees under the FWS.


531-1-30         RESPONSIBILITIES
A.		Office of Human Resources (OHR), Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA), is responsible for:
1.	Updating and maintaining this policy;
2.	Advising operating Human Resources organizations on the administration of the authority to set pay based on superior qualifications and/or special needs; and,
3.	Coordinating any requested HHS reports to the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on the administration of this authority. 
B.	   Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions (OPDIVs) are responsible for:
1.	Ensuring compliance with the requirements of this policy within their respective organizations;
2.	Establishing procedures to ensure that all requirements for authorizing pay based on superior qualifications and/or special needs are properly approved, recorded, and documented; and,
3.	Establishing documentation and record-keeping requirements that are sufficient to allow reconstruction of the action taken in each case.  Records must be maintained for a minimum of three years.  Each request must include: (1) a description of the superior qualifications of the individual or the special need of the agency; (2) an explanation of the factors used to justify the rate at which the employee’s pay was set and how the factors directly relate to the rate approved; and, (3) the reasons for authorizing an advanced rate instead of (or in addition to) a recruitment incentive.
C.	Operating Human Resources Organizations (OHROs) are responsible for:
1.	Advising and consulting with OPDIVs on the use of this authority and alternative incentives;
2.	Verifying that candidates are eligible to receive an advanced rate of pay under this authority; and
3.	Making official salary offers to candidates for appointment.
D.	Supervisors, managers, and other hiring officials are responsible for: 
1.	Maintaining the confidentiality of the pay setting process.  Selecting officials must not initiate discussions of advanced rates of pay with candidates but may have a preliminary discussion of the subject when initiated by a candidate.  
2.	Upon initial employment with the Federal Government, the starting salary for most employees is expected to be the rate for step one (1) on the applicable salary schedule for the grade level being filled.  Initial salary offers must come from the OHRO.  
3.	If a candidate indicates he or she wishes to negotiate the salary offer, the OHRO will contact the hiring official to determine if he or she is interested in requesting approval to set the candidate’s pay at a higher rate.
