
531-1-40 	GENERAL POLICY

A.	An OPDIV may determine that a candidate has superior qualifications based on:

1.	The level, type, or quality of the candidate’s skills or competencies demonstrated or obtained through experience and/or education;
2.	The quality of the candidate’s accomplishments compared to others in the field; and/or
3.	Other factors that support a superior qualifications determination.
B.	When pay is set at an advanced rate based on superior qualifications, a candidate’s skills, competencies, experience, education, and/or accomplishments must be relevant to the requirements of the position to be filled.  These qualities must be significantly higher than that needed to be minimally qualified for the position and/or be of a more specialized quality compared to other candidates.
C.	An OPDIV may determine that a candidate fills a special need if the type, level, or quality of skills and competencies or other qualities and experiences possessed by the candidate are relevant to the requirements of the position and are essential to accomplishing an important agency mission, goal, or program activity.  A candidate also may meet the special need criteria by meeting agency workforce needs, as documented in the OPDIV’s strategic human capital plan.
D.	An OPDIV may consider one or more of the following factors to determine the step at which to set an employee’s pay using this authority:
1.	The level, type, or quality of the candidate’s skills or competencies;
2.	The candidate’s existing salary, recent salary history, or salary documented in a competing job offer (taking into consideration the location where the salary was or would be earned and comparing the salary to Federal pay rates in the same location);
3.	Significant disparities between Federal and non-Federal salaries for the skills and competencies required in the position to be filled;
4.	Existing labor market conditions and employment trends, including the availability and quality of candidates for the same or similar positions;
5.	The success of recent efforts to recruit candidates for the same or similar positions;
6.	Significant turnover in the same or similar positions;
7.	The importance/criticality of the position to be filled and the effect on the agency if it is not filled or if there is a delay in filling it;
8.	The desirability of the geographic location, duties, and/or work environment associated with the position;
9.	OPDIV workforce needs, as documented in the OPDIV’s strategic human capital plan; and/or
10.	Other relevant factors.
E.	Approving officials should exercise judgment when a candidate’s existing or recent salary is the basis for setting pay at an advanced rate.  Salary claims must be documented to ensure that only actual earnings are considered.
1.	Income from outside employment that forms a regular, continuing portion of the candidate's total income and that the candidate will not be able to continue as a Federal employee may be considered in setting the pay rate.  A written statement signed and dated by the candidate stating that the compensation will be forfeited must be included with the request for approval of an advanced rate of pay.  Income from other sources that will continue during Federal employment may not be considered.  
2.	Although benefits comparisons are not typically required, it may be appropriate to consider the value of Federal fringe benefits when evidence exists that a candidate’s current benefits are significantly less or greater than those offered to Federal employees.  In general, the value of Federal benefits can be considered to be 38% of an employee’s salary.  
3.	Annual Federal salary rates are based on a full-time work schedule of 40 hours per week.  The most meaningful comparisons between salaries are made between equalized conditions.  
a.	Normally, income earned from overtime work should not be considered when comparing salaries.  
b.	When considering the income of an individual who is employed on a part-time basis, comparing hourly rates of pay will provide a more accurate comparison of salaries.  
c.	Special care must be taken when considering bonuses and stock options so that only those amounts that can be adequately quantified and are a regular and recurring part of an individual’s income are considered.
4.	Compensation of a former (retired or resigned) member of a uniformed service (including the Commissioned Corps of the Public Health Service) may serve as a basis for setting pay under this Instruction.  Total pay, including regular allowances, may be included for salary comparison purposes.

F.	It is not appropriate to use the salary earned as a former expert or consultant for the Federal Government appointed under 5 USC 3109 to justify an advanced rate when an individual's last position is that of an expert or consultant for the Federal Government.  Income forfeited at the time the individual became an expert or consultant may be used for determining the appropriate step.

G.	An advanced rate may be based on earnings as an expert or consultant outside the Federal government.  The advanced rate should take into account average income earned by the candidate over the past two years and other legitimate and confirmed consulting offers the candidate may have.  The value of Federal benefits should be considered when comparing Federal salary rates with the compensation of independent consultants.  In many instances, independent consultants do not receive benefits and must pay the full cost of Social Security.

H.	Due to the developmental nature of such programs, it is inappropriate to use the superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority for the appointment of individuals in programs such as the Federal Career Intern Program, the Emerging Leaders Program, the Presidential Management Fellows Program, the Student Career Experience Program, the Student Temporary Employment Program, or comparable entry level, developmental programs.

I.	Under a vacancy announcement that covers multiple grade levels, if a candidate is not within reach for selection consideration at a higher grade level due to a veterans’ preference eligible, the OPDIV may only approve a limited advanced rate of pay if the candidate is selected at a lower grade level.  In such instances, an OPDIV may authorize an advanced rate of pay that is no greater than 94% of the step one (1) rate of pay for the higher grade level.

J.	In determining whether to use the superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority and the level at which the employee’s payable rate of basic pay should be set, an OPDIV must consider the possibility of authorizing a recruitment incentive under 5 CFR part 575, subpart A instead of, or in addition to, an advanced rate of pay.

