
531-2
Material Transmitted:

HHS Instruction 531-2, Setting Salary

Material Superseded:

HHS Instruction 531-2 (all)
HHS Instruction 532-5 (all)
HHS Instruction 536-1 (all)

Background:
This Instruction has been revised consistent with recent changes in the organization of HHS,  and in support of HHS administrative initiatives  calling  for more  streamlined  rules  and greater delegations of authority.

Under this issuance, three Instructions have been consolidated because of similar subject matter and the  need for greater streamlining of the rules.

Any reference to "OPDIV" in this Instruction now includes the PHS agencies, the Office of the Secretary, the Program Support Center, HCFA, ACF, and AOA.

This issuance is effective immediately.  Implementation of this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

Filing Instructions:
Remove superseded material and file new material. Post receipt of this transmittal to the HHS Check List of Transmittals and file this transmittal in sequential order after the check list.





Eugene  Kinlow
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources, OASMB



INSTRUCTION 531-2

Distribution:  MS (PERS):  HRFC-001 
HHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 531-2
POSITION CLASSIFICATION PROGRAM

531-2-00	Purpose and Authority
	10	References
	20	Pay Setting
	30	Grade and Pay Retention

531-2-00  PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY

This Instruction states the Department's policy and provides guidance concerning the determination of basic pay of General Schedule (GS) employees and the entitlement of GS and Federal Wage System (FWS) employees to grade and pay retention.

531-2-10  REFERENCES

A.	U.S. Code, Chapter 53 (law - pay rates and systems)
B.	CFR, Part 531 (regulations - pay under the General Schedule)
C.	CFR, Part 536 (regulations - grade and pay retention)
D.	HHS Instruction 338-2 (appointments above the minimum because of superior qualifications)
E.	HHS Instruction 351-1 (reduction in force (RIF))
