
531-1-50 	DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY

A.	Authority to approve an advanced rate of pay under 5 USC 5333 based on the superior qualifications of the candidate or a special need of the agency for the candidate's services is delegated to the Heads of Operating and Staff Divisions for employees and positions within their authority.  Further redelegation is authorized.  In exercising this approval authority, Heads of Operating and Staff Divisions may not approve an advanced rate of pay unless the action complies with the provisions of this Instruction and Federal regulations regarding superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority found in 5 CFR §531.212.
B.	Authority to appoint individuals in the Federal service and to set pay is delegated to the Directors of OHROs.  Further redelegation is authorized.  In exercising this authority, Directors of OHROs may not establish pay for an employee under this Instruction unless the action complies with the provisions of this Instruction and Federal regulations regarding superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority found in 5 CFR §531.212

531-1-60	PROCEDURES

A.	An official with delegated approval authority must approve each determination to use the superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority prior to the candidate entering on duty.  Once an employee has entered on duty, an advanced rate of pay under these procedures cannot be made prospectively or retroactively.
B.	Each determination must be made in writing and reviewed and approved by an official of the OPDIV who is at least one level higher than the employee’s supervisor, unless there is no official at a higher level in the OPDIV.

531-1-70	DOCUMENTATION AND ACCOUNTABILITY
A.	Documentation
1.	OPDIVs are required to ensure that each request to set pay at an advanced rate based on superior qualifications and/or a special need is properly approved, recorded, and documented.
2.	OPDIVs must document all of the following for each determination to use the superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority sufficient to allow reconstruction of the action taken in each case:
a.	The superior qualifications of the candidate and/or the special agency need for the candidate’s services that justifies a higher than minimum rate;
b.	An explanation of the factor(s) and supporting documentation which were used to justify the rate at which the employee’s pay is set.  The written documentation must explain how the factors directly relate to the rate approved; and,
c.	The reasons for authorizing a higher than minimum rate instead of or in addition to a recruitment incentive under 5 CFR part 575, subpart A.

B.	Accountability
The OHR, OHRO, and OPDIV will conduct such oversight activities as required to ensure that superior qualifications and special needs pay-setting authority is administered in accordance with law, regulations and HHS policies and procedures.
