
2.	Pay Rate Setting
a.  Geographic Conversion Rule.  The rule must be applied before determining pay if the employee’s official worksite is covered by a different locality schedule as a result of a pay retention entitlement action.  The employee’s rate of basic pay must be converted to the applicable schedule in the new location before the demotion.
b.   The employee receives the rate of pay before placement in the lower grade on whichever is higher:
i.   Locality schedule for the new official worksite; or
ii.  Special rate schedule that applies to the former position.
c.  An employee entitled to pay retention is entitled to the lowest rate of basic pay in the employee’s grade after the action is taken which equals or exceeds his or her current rate of basic pay.   If there is no such rate, then the employee retains either his or her current rate of basic pay or 150 percent maximum rate of basic pay for the employee’s grade after the action is taken, whichever is less.
3.    Pay Increases While on Pay Retention.  An employee receiving pay retention is entitled to 50% of any change in the maximum rate for the employee’s position of record.  This change may occur as a result of adjustments to nationwide, locality, or special salary rate schedules. 
4.	Termination of Pay Retention. Pay retention terminates when an employee: 
a.	Has a break in service of one work day or more;
b.	Is demoted for personal cause or at his or her own request;
c.	Becomes entitled to a rate of basic pay which is equal to or greater than the retained rate;
d.	Declines a reasonable offer to a position with a rate equal to or greater than the retained rate; or
e.	Moves to a position not under a covered pay system.

K.	Pay Setting upon Removal from Position during Probation
1.    A supervisor or manager who fails to successfully complete the required supervisory/managerial probationary period will be placed in a position of no lower grade step than the job (s)he left to accept the supervisory or managerial position.
2.  A nonsupervisory or non-managerial employee who is demoted into a position in which a probationary period is required, and who, for reasons of managerial/supervisory performance, does not complete the probationary period is entitled to be reassigned to a position at the same grade and pay as the position in which he/she was serving during the probationary period. 

L.	Change to Lower Grade. An employee is paid as follows when reduced in grade:

1.	Change to Lower Grade at an Employee’s Request.  When an employee initiates a request, the employee’s pay will be determined by placing his/her HPR in the lower grade.  If the HPR falls between two steps, the employee’s maximum payable rate is set at the lower step.  

2.	Change to Lower Grade When Beneficial to the Department. 
a.	When an employee is placed in a lower-graded position because of a management action such as reduction in force or reclassification, the employee’s pay will be set by placing his/her maximum payable rate in the lower grade.  If the maximum payable rate falls between two steps, the employee’s rate is set at the higher step.  The employee may be eligible for grade and/or pay retention upon meeting specific eligibility requirements enumerated in 532-1-50 I. and J.
b.	The pay setting action must be documented in writing, demonstrating a benefit to the Government by reflecting management's need for the employee's knowledge and skills and the avoidance of costs associated with recruitment, reduction in force, training, etc.  When the higher grade from which the employee is being changed to lower grade is covered by special salary rates, the higher graded position must also be within HHS and the appointing authorities covering both positions must agree that the lower graded assignment is in the best interest of the Government.
3.	Change to Lower Grade to Enter a Developmental Position.  When an employee requests a change to a lower grade to accept a position which is less than the top of a career ladder, the highest rate that may be used in setting the employee’s salary is the rate in the lower grade which, upon repromotion, will place the employee at the rate of pay he/she would have attained if the employee had remained in the higher grade, unless the employee is covered by grade and/or pay retention.  This includes any step increases the employee would have received if he/she had remained at the higher grade during the period of time used to qualify for repromotion.  For example, if an employee would have received step 3 of the former grade during that period, the rate of pay at step 3 is used in determining the employee’s pay at the lower grade.
4.   Change to Lower Grade for Personal Cause.  Employees changed to lower grades for personal cause shall not have their pay set in accordance with the HPR.  When an employee is changed to a lower grade for personal cause (e.g., inefficiency, less than fully successful performance, misconduct, etc.), his/her pay will be reduced the equivalent of at least two within-grade increases of the higher grade from which reduced.  If the two-step equivalent computation (based on an hourly rate) falls between two steps of the lower grade, the lower step rate must be used. Management may set the employee's pay as low as the first step of the grade to which the employee is demoted.  However, when an employee's pay, using the above computation, falls above step 5 of the lower grade, the rate of pay will be set at step 5.  An employee who is reduced in grade for personal cause is not eligible for grade or pay retention.  However, in situations where an employee is unable to perform the duties of the position assigned due to a physical or medical condition beyond the employee’s control, the reduction in grade is not considered for personal cause.  

