
E.	Promotion to a Position in a Different Wage Area.  The employee's pay entitlement shall be determined as if there were two pay actions; a promotion and a reassignment.  The actions shall be processed in the order which gives the employee the maximum benefit.

F.	Temporary Promotion.  Rates of pay earned for more than one year under a temporary promotion are highest previous rates.  Upon return to a lower grade immediately following a temporary promotion, the employee’s existing rate of pay is the rate used to set pay provided the temporary promotion grade in which the higher rate was earned was held for more than one year.  When a temporary promotion is made permanent immediately after the temporary promotion ends, the employee is not returned to the lower grade in order to process the permanent promotion.  The employee’s temporary promotion is converted to a permanent promotion without a change in pay.

G.	Details.  An appropriated fund FWS employee detailed to a position other than the position to which appointed shall be paid at the rate of the position to which appointed. 

H.	Simultaneous Actions.  If an employee is entitled to more than one pay change concurrently, the OHRO will process the pay changes in the order which will provide the employee the maximum pay benefit.  If an employee is entitled to both and increase in pay and a personnel or appointment change at the same time, the increased rate of pay is deemed the employee’s existing rate of pay when the personnel or appointment change is processed.

I.	Grade Retention.  Allows an employee to retain the grade of his/her position for pay administration purposes for 2 years after placement in a lower-graded position. 

1.	Employee Eligibility.  The employee is entitled to grade retention if (s)he meets the criteria indicated and has been placed in a lower-graded position for one of the following reasons:
a.	Reduction in Force (RIF).  An employee must have served for at least 52 consecutive weeks in a permanent appointment in a position under the Federal Wage System at a grade or higher than the position to which the employee is being demoted because of the RIF.  The time served could have been in more than one position and in more than one OPDIV.
b.	Classification to a lower grade.  When an employee is downgraded to correct a classification error or to implement a new classification standard, (s)he is entitled to grade retention if the position that is being downgraded has been classified at the higher grade for at least 1 continuous year immediately before the action. 
2.  Termination of Grade Retention.  Grade retention terminates after 2 calendar years.  It also terminates if the employee: 
a.	Has a break in service of one workday or more;
b. 	Is demoted for personal cause or at his or her own request from the grade actually occupied;
c.	Moves to a position under a covered pay system with a grade that is equal to or higher than the retained grade, excluding a temporary promotion;
d. 	Declines a reasonable offer of a position at or above the retained grade;
e.	Elects in writing to have grade retention terminated; or
f. 	Moves to a position not under a covered pay system.

J.	Pay Retention.  Allows an employee to keep his/her former rate of pay when that pay is higher than the maximum rate of the grade in which the employee is placed.  (Note:  ‘Pay retention’ is similar to ‘saved rate’ which was applicable to the Federal Wage System prior to the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978).

1.   Employee Eligibility.   Pay retention must be provided to an employee in a position under a covered pay system whose payable rate of basic pay otherwise would be reduced as a result of:
a.   The expiration of the 2-year grade retention period;
b.   A RIF or reclassification that places the employee in a lower-graded position when the employee does not meet grade retention eligibility requirements;
c.   A management action that places an employee in a government-wide training program, such as upward mobility, apprenticeship, or career intern;
d.   A reduction or elimination of special rate schedules or a management action that places an employee in a non-special rate or lower-paid special rate position;
e.   A management action that places an employee in a different (lower) pay schedule; or 
f.   An entitlement to a payable rate upon promotion that exceeds the top step of the grade to which (s)he is promoted. 

