
532-1-100	PREMIUM PAY

A.	The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) of 1938 (as amended) covers any employee of an agency who is not specifically excluded by another statute and is not FLSA exempt (meaning not covered by the overtime provisions of the FLSA).  Generally, FWS employees are presumed to be FLSA nonexempt (meaning covered by the overtime provisions of the FLSA) unless management proves otherwise.”   See 5 C.F.R. 551.202(a).  The section on Premium Pay addresses HHS policy as it relates to FLSA non-exempt employees, unless otherwise stated.

B.	Overtime Pay.  FWS non-exempt employees are entitled to be paid for authorized and approved overtime worked in excess of 8 hours in a day or in excess of 40 hours in an administrative week, whichever results in the greater number of overtime hours including irregular and occasional overtime work and regular overtime work. 

1.	Nonsupervisory FWS Employees.  A nonsupervisory FWS employee is presumed to be nonexempt under the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (FLSA) and shall be paid for overtime work performed at the rate of 1.5 times the employee’s normal wage rate.  A nonsupervisory FWS employee is considered exempt if (s)he is performing temporary work or duties that meet FLSA exemption criteria.
2.	Supervisory FWS Employees.  A supervisory FWS employee is presumed to be non-exempt under the FLSA and shall be paid for overtime work performed at the rate of 1.5 times the employee’s normal wage rate.  A supervisory FWS employee is considered exempt if the employee meets the FLSA executive, administrative, or foreign exemption criteria, or performs temporary work or duties that meet FLSA exemption criteria.
3.   Exempt employees may be paid overtime on an hour-for-hour basis (that is 1.0 times the hourly rate). An employer may require an exempt employee to accept compensatory time instead of overtime premium pay.  However, non-exempt employees must be given the choice between 1.5 overtime pay or compensatory time off.

C.  	Compensatory Time Usage. 
1.  At a non-exempt employee’s request, OPDIVs may grant compensatory time off from an employee’s tour of duty instead of overtime payment, for an equal amount of irregular or occasional authorized and approved overtime.  OPDIVs cannot require non-exempt FWS employees to receive compensation for overtime with an equal amount of compensatory time off from his/her tour of duty. 
2.	If accrued compensatory time off is not used within 26 pay periods or if employees transfer to another agency or separate from Federal service before the expiration of the 26 pay period time limit, employees must be paid for the earned compensatory time off at the overtime rate in effect when earned.

D.	Night Shift Differentials, Holiday Pay, and Sunday Pay.

1.	Night Shift Differentials.  Employees may be entitled to be paid a night shift differential for the circumstances enumerated below:
a.	Absence on holidays.  An employee regularly assigned to a shift for which a night shift differential is payable shall be paid the night shift differential for a period of excused absence on a legal holiday or other day off from duty granted by Executive or administrative order.  
	b.	Travel status.   An employee regularly assigned to a shift for which a night shift differential is payable shall be paid the night shift differential for hours of the employee's tour of duty while in official travel status, regardless of whether the employee is performing work.   
      c.	Temporary tour of duty.  An employee regularly assigned to a: 
i.   Night shift who is temporarily assigned to a day shift or to a night shift having a lower night shift differential shall continue to receive the regular night shift differential, a temporary detail for training purposes is also included  (5 CFR 410.602).
ii.  Night shift, who is temporarily assigned to another night shift having a higher differential, shall be paid the higher differential if a majority of the employee's regularly scheduled non-overtime hours of work on the temporary shift fall within hours having the higher differential.
ii. Day shift who are temporarily assigned to a night shift shall be paid a night shift differential.
    
     d.	Leave with pay.  An employee:
i.   Regularly assigned to a night shift shall be paid a night shift differential during a period of leave with pay.
ii. Regularly assigned to a day shift who is temporarily assigned to a night shift shall be paid a night shift differential for any leave with pay taken when scheduled to work night shifts.
iii. Assigned to regular rotating schedule involving work on both day and night shifts shall be paid a night shift differential only for any leave with pay taken when scheduled to work night shifts.
iv. Who is not regularly assigned to a day shift or a night shift but whose shift is changed at irregular intervals shall be paid a night shift differential during leave with pay if the employee received a night shift differential for the last shift worked preceding leave with pay.
  
2.	Holiday Pay. Employees who are entitled to holiday premium pay and who perform work on a holiday which is not overtime work shall be paid the employee’s rate of basic pay plus premium pay at a rate equal to the rate of basic pay for holiday work that is not in access of 8 hours.
a.   Employee shall be paid for overtime work performed on a holiday at the same rate as for overtime paid on other workdays.   
b.   Employees entitled to holiday premium pay and required to report for work on a holiday shall be paid at least two hours of holiday pay whether or not work is actually performed.

3.	Sunday Pay.  An employee whose regular work schedule includes an 8-hour period of service that is not overtime work, a part of which is Sunday, is entitled to additional pay at the rate of 25 percent of his hourly rate of basic pay for each hour of work performed during that 8-hour period of service.  For employees serving outside the United States in areas where Sunday is a routine workday and another day of the week is officially recognized as the day of rest and worship, the Secretary of State may designate the officially recognized day of rest and worship as the day with respect to which the preceding sentence shall apply instead of Sunday.

      Full-time employees whose regular tours of duty include Sunday must be paid up to 8-hours of Sunday premium while in a paid leave or excused absence status during that Sunday tour.  (U. S. court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit – Armitage, et. Al. v. United States).


532-1-110	WAGE COMMITTEE

A.	The lead agency would have the responsibility for establishing an agency wage committee for the purpose of considering matters relating to the conduct of wage surveys, the establishment of wage schedules, and making recommendations thereon to the lead agency.
    
B.	If the lead agency terminates a wage schedule, the OHRO servicing the OPDIV in which the wage schedule applies shall discuss the termination with the appropriate official or officials of exclusively recognized employee organizations representing employees in the affected occupation.
    
532-1-120	DOCUMENTATION AND ACCOUNTABILITY

All regulatory discretionary actions should be documented on the SF-50.  This includes (but is not limited to) appointments above the minimum rate, use of highest previous rate, grade and pay retention and change to lower grade. 

