
Subject:   ESTABLISHMENT OF TEMPORARY OR SEASONAL CONSTRUCTION
	    PAY RATES

 532-7-00	Purpose and Authority
	10	Coverage
	20	References
	30	Policy
	40	How Rates are Determined
	50	Adjustment of Rates

532-7-00     PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY

This Instruction states the Department's policy and procedures for establishing the rates of pay for employees who perform construction work on Public Law (P.L.) 86-121 projects.  The provisions of this Instruction have been developed under the authority provided to departments by FPM Supplement 532-1, Appendix V, for P.L. 86-121 projects to construct sanitary facilities for Native Americans.

532-7-10     COVERAGE

This Instruction covers temporary or seasonally-hired employees who
perform craft, trade, and labor work on P.L. 86-121 projects which provide
for the construction, repair, and maintenance of sanitary facilities for
American Indians and Alaskan natives.

532-7-20     REFERENCES

A.	Public Law 86-121 (law authorizing construction, repair and maintenance of sanitary facilities for Native Americans)
	
B.	Davis-Bacon Act (40 U.S.C. 276a, wage rates for laborers, craftsmen, and mechanics involved in construction on which Federal funds are expended)
	
C.	FPM Supplement 532-1, Appendix V, paragraph H (construction schedules)

532-7-30     POLICY

It is the policy of this Department to set temporary or seasonal construction rates consistent with published Davis-Bacon Act rates of pay for labor, trades, and crafts employees and any restrictions imposed on pay by the President, the Congress, or the Office of Personnel Management.. 

532-7-40     HOW RATES ARE DETERMINED

Rates for temporary or seasonal construction employees are determined in accordance with Davis-Bacon pay rates issued by the Department of Labor (DOL).  These rates are issued by DOL for use by the private sector and other Federal agencies.  They are used in arriving at comparable pay rates for employees working on Federally funded construction projects in specific geographic areas within the United States.  These rates reflect the minimum wage payable for blue collar employees working for contractors on Federally sponsored highway, residential, and highrise construction. Whenever available, residential construction rates are used. If residential rates are unavailable, highway construction rates will be used. If Davis-Bacon rates are unavailable, the Department may use survey rates from any other available source.  As stated in 532-7-30, all pay rates must comply with any restriction imposed by the President, Congress, or the Office of Personnel Management.

532-7-50     ADJUSTMENT OF RATES

Temporary or seasonal construction wages will be reviewed and appropriate adjustments made annually by the Division of Pay and Performance Programs. The adjustments will normally be made in the first quarter of the calendar year so as to be available for the construction season. The Division will specify effective dates and forward adjusted rates to affected servicing personnel offices for implementation.

