
532-1-60	WITHIN-GRADE INCREASES (WGIs)

A.	Entitlement.  A FWS employee will be automatically advanced to the next higher within-grade step (following completion of the required period of creditable service) provided the employee has a work performance rating of satisfactory or better and has not received an equivalent increase in pay during his or her waiting period.  

B. 	However, consistent with the HHS performance management regulations and collective bargaining agreements, supervisors and managers should consult with OHROs as soon as an employee’s performance falls below the satisfactory level to determine the appropriate course of action. 

C.  	Within-grade increases—waiting periods.

1.	Nonsupervisory and leader employees. 
a.   For a full-time nonsupervisory or leader employee, and for a part-time nonsupervisory or  leader employee with a prearranged regularly scheduled tour of duty, the waiting periods for advancement to the second, third, fourth, and fifth rates in all grades are:
i.	Rate 2 – 26 calendar weeks of creditable service in rate 1.
ii.	Rate 3 – 78 calendar weeks of creditable service in rate 2.
iii.	Rates 4 and 5 – 104 weeks of creditable service in each of steps 3 and 4.
b. 	For a part-time nonsupervisory or leader employee without a prearranged regularly scheduled tour of duty, the waiting period for advancement to the second, third, fourth, and fifth rates in all grades are: 
i.	Rate 2 – 130 days of creditable service in a pay status in rate 1 over a period of no less than 26 calendar weeks.
ii.	Rate 3 – 390 days of creditable service in a pay status in rate 2 over a period of no less than 78 calendar weeks. 
iii.	Rate 4 – 520 days of creditable service in a pay status in rate 3 over a period of no less than 104 weeks.
iv.	Rate 5 – 520 days of creditable service in a pay status in rate 4 over a period of no less than 104 weeks.
Any day on which a part-time service is performed constitutes a full day. 
2.   Supervisory employees. 
a.	For a full-time supervisory employee, and for a part-time supervisory employee with a prearranged regularly scheduled tour of duty, the waiting periods for advancement to the second, third, fourth, and fifth rates in all grades are: 
i.	Rate 2 – 26 weeks of creditable service in rate 1; 
ii.	Rate 3 – 78 weeks of creditable service in rate 2; 
iii.	Rate 4 – 104 weeks of creditable service in rate 3; and 
iv.	Rate 5 – 104 weeks of creditable service in rate 4.
b.  For a part-time supervisory employee without a prearranged regularly scheduled tour of duty, the waiting period for advancement to the second, third, fourth, and fifth rates in all grades are:
i.	Rate 2 – 130 days of creditable service in a pay status in rate 1 over a period of no less than 26 calendar weeks; 
ii.	Rate 3 – 390 days of creditable service in a pay status in rate 2 over a period of no less than 78 calendar weeks; 
iii.	Rate 4 – 520 days of creditable service in a pay status in rate 3 over a period of no less than 104 calendar weeks; 
iv.	Rate 5 – 520 days of creditable service in a pay status in rate 4 over a period of no less than 104 calendar weeks.
Any day on which a part-time service is performed constitutes a full day. 

3.	Start of waiting period.  A waiting period starts: 
a.	At the beginning of a new appointment as an employee of the Federal Government or the government of the District of Columbia; 
b.	After a nonpay period or a break in service when the non-pay period or break in service exceeds 52 calendar weeks; or 
c.	Upon receiving an equivalent increase.

NOTE:  For purposes of this section, a calendar week is a period of any 7 calendar days. 

D.  	Effective Date.  A within-grade increase is made effective at the beginning of the first applicable pay period following the date an employee becomes eligible for the increase.

532-1-70	APPLICATION OF WAGE SCHEDULES

A.  	The lead agency shall issue nonsupervisory, leader, and supervisory regular wage schedules for the local wage area, showing the rates of pay for all grades and steps.  The wage schedules shall have a single effective date for all employees in the local wage area.  The Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (ASAM) shall authorize the application of the wage schedules issued by the lead agency for HHS employees in the local wage areas. 

B.	Delayed Application of a Wage Schedule.  No employee will be required to suffer a hardship because of a delayed application of a pay schedule.  Hence, no retroactive change will be made if the actions taken and payments made during the period of retroactivity are more advantageous to the employee than the rate from the new schedule.  

532-1-80	MOVEMENTS BETWEEN PAY SYSTEMS, WAGE SCHEDULES AND WAGE AREAS

A.	Movements from General Schedule (GS) to FWS. In order to determine the appropriate rate of pay, these steps should followed:
1.	Convert the annual rate of GS pay to an hourly rate of pay by dividing the annual rate by 2,087.
2.	Compare the representative rates for GS and FWS grades to determine the appropriate nature of action (i.e., the second rate on a five-rate regular wage schedule, the fourth rate on the General Schedule).
3.	Set pay at the maximum payable rate of the grade in which placed as appropriate.

B.	Movement from GS to FWS in a non-foreign overseas area (i.e., travel to or within Alaska or Hawaii).  Any non-foreign area differential or cost-of-living allowance an employee is receiving in the General Schedule job is added to his/her scheduled rate of pay for establishing the rate of pay in the FWS position.  The non-foreign area differential or cost-of-living allowance is not added to the representative rate when determining the nature of the action.


532-1-90	ENVIRONMENTAL DIFFERENTIAL PAY (EDP)

OHROs are responsible for paying FWS employees an EDP when the employee is performing assigned duties which expose him/her to an usually severe hazard, physical hardship, or working condition in the following circumstances: 

A.	Hazard which could result in significant injury, illness, or death.

B.	Hardship under circumstances which cause significant physical discomfort or distress; or 

C.	Working condition involving exposure to fumes, dust, or noise which causes significant distress or discomfort.

Efforts to avoid and/or protect employees from such hazards, physical hardships, or working conditions is of utmost priority. EDP is paid only where such exposure is unavoidable.

B.	Authorized environmental differentials for exposure to various degrees of hazards, physical hardships, and working conditions are enumerated in 5 CFR, Part 532, “Appendix A to Subpart E-Schedule of Environmental Differentials Paid for Exposure to Various Degrees of Hazards, Physical Hardships, and Working Conditions of an Unusual Nature”. An employee will not be paid for more than one EDP for a particular period of work. EDP is computed based on the highest EDP rate authorized for the period of entitlement.  The hours covered by EDP shall not exceed the number of hours worked by the employee on the day of exposure except as required by 5 CFR § 532.511(b)(3). 

C.	Relationship to other Pay.  EDP is included as part of an employee’s basic rate of pay and must be used to compute premium pay (e.g. pay for overtime, holiday, or Sunday work) and deductions for retirement and life insurance.  However, it is not part of basic pay for purposes of lump-sum annual leave payments and severance pay nor is the loss of this pay an adverse action. 
