
532-1-30 	COVERAGE AND EXCLUSIONS

A.	Coverage.  This Instruction covers HHS FWS employees.  It also covers FWS pay-setting matters that address both regulatory and discretionary requirements.

B.	Exclusions.  This instruction does not cover the wage survey process or the FWS job grading system.  The survey process is sufficiently covered in OPM regulation and guidance.  The  job grading system is covered in OPM’s Job Grading System.

532-1-40	RESPONSIBILITIES

Operating Human Resource Organizations (OHROs) are responsible for:

A.		Setting pay for newly appointed employees and for employees who are reemployed, reassigned, transferred, promoted, or changed to a lower grade;  

B.		Making new or revised wage schedules effective on the date specified on the schedule for all covered employees within the local wage area; 

C.		Paying Environmental Differential Pay (EDP) to FWS employees; and

D.		Establishing FWS apprentice schedules to cover FWS Worker Trainees. 

532-1-50	FWS PAY-SETTING

A.	New Appointments.  Except as provided in 532-1-50 (B) and (C) below, a new appointment shall be made at the minimum rate of the grade.

B.	Appointments Above the Minimum Rate.
1.	Operating Human Resource Organizations (OHROs) may make new appointments at a rate above the minimum rate of the appropriate grade in recognition of special qualifications, exceptional skills or qualifications, or highly specialized expertise in a particular trade or craft critical to mission accomplishment.  When an applicant is appointed to a step higher than the minimum, the merit promotion files and the remarks on the Notification of Personnel Action, Standard Form 50, should document the basis for the higher step.
2.	Appointments above minimum rates for jobs in specific hard-to-fill occupations.  The lead  agency (The Department of Defense) for a local wage area may authorize use of any scheduled rate above the minimum rate as the appointment rate for one or more grades of an occupation at one or more locations within a wage area based upon the following: 
a.	The hiring prevailing rate for a particular occupation and grade in the private sector in a specific location is higher than the minimum rate for the comparable grade on the local Federal wage schedule; and 
b.	Local Federal installations and activities cannot recruit qualified employees at that minimum rate.
C.		Use of Highest Previous Rate (HPR). When an employee is reemployed, reassigned, transferred, promoted, or changed to a lower grade, the OHRO may set pay at any rate of the new grade that does not exceed the employee’s highest previous rate.  However, if the rate of pay falls between two step-rates of the new grade, the OHRO will set pay at the higher of the two.

1.	The rate or step selected for the employee should be comparable to the rate and step employees receive in the same or similar jobs with similar qualifications.  The OHRO, after consultation with the hiring manager, will set the rate of pay at any rate between the minimum step of the position and the HPR.
2.	When an employee is demoted at his or her request, with the prospect of repromotion back to the former grade as soon as possible under merit promotion rules, the HR Specialist, in consultation with the OPDIV hiring manager, will select a rate in the lower grade which upon promotion will place the employee in a rate of the higher grade which he/she would have attained if he/she had remained at that grade. 
3.	The HPR remains available for use in subsequent promotions or movement of the employee to another position, unless the restriction in 532-1-50(C) (4) below applies.
4.	The HPR will not be used when an employee's most recent performance rating of record is less than fully successful or the equivalent.  If a current performance rating is not available from the employee’s most recently employed agency, a presumed fully successful rating shall be applicable.  
5.	Documentation of Intended Use of the HPR.  Acceptable HPR documentation is an SF 50 or a similar document, or the employee’s official earnings and leave statement.  When an OHRO intends to use the HPR but does not have sufficient proof of an applicant's or an employee’s previous rate of pay, it cannot grant the HPR until it receives the necessary documentation.  The following steps will be taken:
a.	The employee's pay will be set at the lowest step or another appropriate step in the grade until documentation is received. 
b.	Pending receipt of the documentation, the OHRO must annotate the intent to use the HPR  in the remarks section of  the SF 50. 
c.	Upon receipt of confirmation of the HPR, the employee's pay will be adjusted retroactively to the date of appointment. 
D.	Promotion.  A promoted employee is entitled to be paid at the lowest scheduled rate of pay which exceeds the employee’s existing rate of pay by at least four (4) percent of the representative rate (i.e. normally step two of a five step regular wage schedule) of the grade from which s(he) was promoted. If there is no rate in grade to which the employee is promoted which meets this entitlement, the employee is entitled to: 
1.	The existing rate of pay; or
2.	The maximum scheduled rate of the grade s(he) was promoted to, whichever is higher. 

