532-1-00 	PURPOSE 

This Instruction promulgates the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) pay setting policy for employees covered by the Federal Wage System (FWS).  The FWS is a uniform pay-setting system applicable to Federal appropriated and non-appropriated fund blue-collar or wage grade employees paid by the hour.   

The FWS establishes pay rates for employees whose pay is fixed and adjusted periodically in accordance with the prevailing wage rates in local wage areas.  This pay system covers Federal trades, crafts, laborers, and other blue-collar or wage grade jobs. 

The Department is responsible for ensuring prevailing rates of pay, established during the wage survey process, are applied to prevailing rate employees in accordance with this Instruction and OPM requirements.  Prevailing rates of pay will be established for each wage area in which the Department has employees.  In accordance with existing statute, the wage survey process must involve the participation of labor organizations representing prevailing rate employees.

532-1-10 	REFERENCES

A.	5 USC Chapter 53, Subchapter IV (Law - Pay Rates and Systems)
B.	5 USC Chapter 55, Subchapter V (Premium Pay)
C.	5 CFR Part 315, Subpart I (Regulations - Probation on Initial Appointment to a Supervisory or Managerial Position)
D.	5 CFR Part 532 (Regulations - Prevailing Rate Systems)
E.	5 CFR Part 536 (Regulations - Grade and Pay Retention)
F.	5 CFR Part 550 (Regulations – Pay Administration)
G.	5 CFR Part 551 (Pay Administration under the Fair Labor Standards Act)
H.	HHS Instruction 430-1 (Performance Management and Appraisal Program)
I.	HHS Collective Bargaining Agreements
J.	Operating Manual - Federal Wage System 

532-1-20	DEFINITIONS

A.	Highest Previous Rate (HPR).  The highest rate of basic pay previously received by a person employed in a civilian position in any part of the Federal Government.  This includes service with the government of the District of Columbia for employees first employed by that government before October 1, 1987. 

B.	Local Wage Areas.  Specific geographic areas and/or industries surveyed during the wage surveys process.

C.	Pay Plans.  WG = wage grade; WL = wage leader; WS = wage supervisor; WT = worker trainee.

D.	Prevailing Rates of Pay.  Pay rates that are comparable to prevailing levels of pay for comparable levels of work in the private sector within a local wage area.

E.	Representative Rates.  Used to compare grades that are under different pay systems after applying any applicable geographic conversion.  For FWS positions, it is the highest rate of basic pay that applies to the second step of the grade. 

F.	Special Pay Rates. OPM-approved supplements to regular pay rates used to address recruitment or retention issues due to higher non-federal pay rates, geographic remoteness of the area where jobs are locate, or undesirable working conditions. 

G.	Wage Survey Process.  A market-based survey conducted by the Department of Defense to set rates of pay on each regular FWS wage schedule with the advice of a labor-management wage committee. 

