
F.	Approval of Student Loan Payments

1.	Approval for student loan repayments will be made in accordance with established OPDIV operating procedures.

G.	Termination of Benefits

1.	An employee receiving loan repayment benefits will be ineligible for continued benefits if he/she separates from the OPDIV for any reason; fails to maintain a fully satisfactory level of performance; or violates any of the conditions of the service agreement.  

2.	The SLRP is only for federally insured loans.  If at any time the employee consolidates to a non-federally insured loan, then the employee will be ineligible for future payments on non-federally insured loans. (Note:  the employee is not responsible for paying back previous benefits already paid on federally insured loans as long as all other conditions of the service agreement were met).

H.	Waiver of Student Loan Indebtedness

1.	Repayment of student loan indebtedness may be wholly or partially waived at the discretion of the OPDIV repaying the loan if recovery would be against equity and good conscience or against the public interest.  In making the determination, the OPDIV will take into account consistency, fairness, and the cost to the taxpayer of recovering monies owed to the government.  Employees who meet the criteria for a waiver of their student loan indebtedness must:

a.	Complete a Waiver of Student Loan Indebtedness Information Request document (Appendix 4);   

b.	Attach original Service Agreement (Appendix 2), along with the loan balance from the lending institution, and written justification as to why recovery of the debt would be against equity, good conscience, and the public interest; and

c.	The documents will then be forwarded to the OPDIV approving official for final approval according to OPDIV operating procedures.   

2.	If the waiver request is approved, the Payroll Office will suspend collection of the debt; a personnel action will be generated by the servicing Human Resources Center to terminate the debt collection, and the employee and his/her supervisor will receive written notification from the OPDIV approving official that the debt has been suspended. 


3.	When an employee is separated by death or disability retirement or is unable to continue working because of disability evidenced by acceptable medical documentation, repayment is automatically waived.

537-1-70	DOCUMENTATION, REPORTING, AND ACCOUNTABILITY
A.	Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule.  Generally, records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years.  

B.	Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, or the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved and closed.

C.	ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.

D.	On or before March 31 each year, the ASA/OHR will submit to OPM a report of the Department’s use of the SLRP authority during the previous calendar year.  The report shall include: (1) the number of employees who received SLRP benefits; (2) the job classifications of the recipients (i.e., pay plan, occupational series, and job title); and (3) the cost to the Department for SLRP. 



