537-1-10	PURPOSE

This Instruction implements the Department of Health and Human Services Student Loan Repayment Program (SLRP) as a management tool to facilitate the recruitment and retention of highly qualified candidates and employees.  The SLRP authorizes the repayment of all or part of an outstanding federally insured student loan obligation incurred by a current employee or a candidate to whom an offer of employment has been made.  The decision to offer SLRP is an individual compensation determination that is made on a case-by-case basis based on organizational need, specific case justification, and budgetary limitations without regard to political affiliation, race, color, religion, national origin, sex (including pregnancy and gender identity) marital status, age disability, genetic information, sexual orientation, labor orientation, status as a parent, any other non-merit based factor, unless permitted by statute, or retaliation for exercising a right as a member of any of these categories. 

The SLRP is not an entitlement and is to be used only to the extent that is necessary for effective recruitment and retention purposes.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

537-1-20	COVERAGE AND EXCLUSIONS

A.	Coverage.

Subject to the conditions in 5 U.S.C. 5379 and this Instruction, Operating Divisions (OpDivs)/Staff Divisions (StaffDivs) may approve student loan repayment benefits to recruit a highly qualified job candidate or retain a highly qualified employee who, during the service period established under a service agreement (consistent with § 537.107), will be serving under: 




1.	An appointment other than a time-limited appointment; or

2.	A time-limited appointment if –

a.	The employee (or job candidate) will have at least 3 years remaining under the appointment after the beginning of the service period established under a service agreement; or

b.	The time-limited appointment authority leads to conversion to another appointment of sufficient duration so that his or her employment with the agency is projected to last for at 
least 3 additional years after the beginning of the service period established under a service agreement.

B.	Exclusions. The following employees are ineligible for the Federal SLRP:

1.	Individuals whose federally insured student loans are past due, delinquent, or defaulted;

2.	Those appointed to positions of a confidential, policy determining, policy making, or policy advocating nature (e.g. under Schedule C or 5 CFR §213.3301); 

3.	Individuals who received their diplomas/degrees from unaccredited and/or fraudulent institutions (e.g. diploma mills);

4.	Commissioned Corp Officers in the Public Health Service are not considered “employees” as per Title 5 U.S.C. §2105, and therefore are ineligible to participate in the SLRP;

5.	If at any time the employee consolidates to a non-federally insured loan, then the employee will be ineligible for future payments on non-federally insured loans. (Note:  In these cases, the employee is not responsible for paying previous benefits already paid on federally insured loans, as long as they met all other terms of their service agreement).  

C.	The provisions of this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71, and such actions require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees.  When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.

537-1-30 	REFERENCES
 
A.	Public Law 106-398 amending 5 USC §5379

B.	5 United States Code, §5379 

C.	5 CFR, Part 537 

 

537-1-40	DEFINITIONS

A.	Federal Direct Student Loan.  The U. S. Department of Education is the lender for these loans. Direct Loans include Federal Direct PLUS loans and Federal Direct Stafford loans.

B.	Federal Family Education Loan Program.  These loans are insured by the Department of Education. Loans are privately issued by a bank, credit union, or other lender that participates in the Federal Family Education Loan Programs.

C.	Student Loan Repayment Program (SLRP).  The Federal SLRP permits agencies to repay Federally insured student loans as a recruitment or retention incentive for candidates or current employees of the agency.  The program implements 5 U.S.C. §5379, which authorizes agencies to set up their own student loan repayment programs to attract or retain highly qualified employees.

D.	Student Loan.  A loan made, insured, or guaranteed under parts B, D, or E of Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965; or a health education assistance loan made or insured under Part A of Title VII of the Public Health Service Act, or under Part E of Title VIII of that Act.  Loans covered under The Higher Education Act include such loans as:

1.	Federal Stafford Loans, including Federal subsidized, Federal unsubsidized, direct subsidized, and direct unsubsidized loans;

2.	Federal Supplemental Loans for Students;

3.	Federal Plus Loans -- Federal and Direct Plus Loans;

4.	Federal Consolidation Loans -- direct subsidized and direct unsubsidized;

5.	Defense Loans made before July 1, 1972;

6.	National Direct Student Loans made between 7/1/72 and 7/1/87; and

7.	Federal Perkins Loans.

Loans covered under the Public Health Service Act include loans made under:

1.	The Nursing Student Loan Program;

2.	The Health Profession Student Loan Program; and

3.	The Health Education Assistance Loan Program.

E.	Subsidized Loan.  The U.S. Government pays the interest on the loan while the student is in school, during the 6-month grace period, and during periods of authorized deferment.

F.	Unsubsidized Loan.  The student is responsible for paying the interest accrued while the student is in school, during the 6-month grace period, and during authorized periods of deferment.


