
537-1-50	RESPONSIBILITIES

A.	HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):

1.	Develops Department-wide human resources guidance and policy consistent with HHS and Office of Personnel Management (OPM) policy, procedures and all applicable federal laws and regulations.

2.	Periodically reviews Operating Division and Staff Division procedures, actions, and reports to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations. Required.

B.	OpDiv/StaffDiv Human Resource Offices:

1.	Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.

2.	Funding.  Each OpDiv is responsible for funding its own student loan repayment program, and certification of funds must be obtained according to established StaffDiv budgetary procedures.

3.	Ensure that managers, supervisors and personnel involved in the competitive hiring process are trained and informed of merit systems principles and prohibited personnel practices.  

4.	Ensure that responsibilities under any applicable labor relations statues and union agreements are fulfilled.

5.	Prepare the written justification for requesting use of the SLRP.

6.	Each OpDiv will designate a SLRP coordinator responsible for:

a.	Developing and disseminating operating procedures governing the OpDiv’s use of the Department’s Student Loan Repayment Program;

b.	Providing updates when changes are made to the laws governing the student loan repayment program;

c.	Consolidating OpDiv input for reporting purposes;

d.	Ensuring verification that the student loan is federally insured and loan balance before payment is authorized;

e.	Coordinating with lending institution(s); and

f.	Coordinating with the servicing Human Resources Center, and payroll function.  

7.	Program Controls.  Employees may have both eligible and ineligible loans from the same lending institution.  Therefore, OPDIV’s will institute follow-up procedures with lenders to ensure that payments are made correctly and only to eligible loans.

8.	OPDIV’s will track participants to ensure that service agreements are fulfilled, and recoupment 
procedures will be initiated when a service agreement is not met unless a waiver is requested 


and approved. (See Appendix 4).

9.	OPDIV’s will review participants’ loan balances annually to ensure employees are paying his/her share of the debt before any additional SLRP is made on the employee’s behalf.

10.	OPDIV’s will confirm participants’ performance appraisal prior to each payment.  (Employees must maintain the equivalent of a “fully successful” performance appraisal to receive SLRP benefits.)  

11.	The repayment of a student loan is taxable wages.  OPDIVs/OHROs are responsible for ensuring that tax withholdings are deducted at the time payment is made, e.g., federal income tax, FICA, Medicare withholding, and any applicable state or local income tax.  

C.	Employees:

1.	The employee is responsible for making payments on the portion of the loan not covered by the HHS SLRP.  The employee also is responsible for any income tax obligation resulting from the student loan repayment benefit. 

2.	Fulfilling the requirements of the service agreement.

3.	Responsible for providing adequate documentation of the nature of the loan and its balance.

4.	Payments are made in a single lump sum directly to the financial institution holding the loan, and the employee must obtain a statement from the financial institution stating that the loan is made, insured, or guaranteed under one of the following:  parts B, D or E of Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965; or a health education assistance loan made or insured under part A of Title VII of the Public Health Service Act or under part E of Title VIII of that Act.  Verification that the loan is current (not past due), the loan number, financial institution routing number for electronic transfer of funds (if available) and the payoff amount as of a specific date should be referenced on the statement as well.
