
537-1-60	POLICY

A.	Maximum Repayment Amount.  Eligible employees may be considered for loan repayment assistance up to $10,000 per calendar year, with a $60,000 lifetime maximum for any individual.  Individual loan repayments are made on an annual basis and more than one loan may be repaid so long as the combined repayments do not exceed the annual and lifetime limits.  SLRP may be authorized for recruitment or retention purposes.

B.	Recruitment.  

1.	Loan repayment may be authorized upon the determination that, in the absence of loan repayment benefits, the Operating Division (OPDIV) would have difficulty filling a position with a highly qualified candidate.  Evidence of need may be based on: 

a.	The success of recent efforts to recruit suitable candidates for similar positions, including such indicators as offer acceptance rates, the proportion of positions filled, and the length of 
time required to fill positions.


b.	Recent turnover in the same or similar positions.

c.	Labor market factors that affect the ability to recruit for similar positions.

d.	Need to fill position requiring highly specialized skills or qualifications.

2.	OPDIV managerial staff may consider the following criteria in determining the amount of the Student Loan Repayment:

a.	The severity of the recruiting problem.

b.	Salary levels reported in published salary surveys for comparable non-Federal positions.

c.	The criticality of the position to be filled and the effect on the OPDIV if it is not filled or if there is a delay in filling it.

d.	Current salary of the candidate.

e.	Salary documented in a competing job offer (if available).

f.	The disparity in cost-of-living between the candidate's current residence and the proposed duty station.

g.	The projected cost of further recruitment efforts if the candidate does not accept the position.

h.	The extent of the individual's past training and experience that serves to qualify him/her for the position.

i.	Budget availability.

3.	Each determination for recruitment purposes (including the amount to be paid) must be made 
before the employee enters on duty.  The SLRP may not be used to recruit an individual from another Federal agency.

C.	Retention.  

1.	In a case where the employee is likely to leave the agency for employment outside the Federal service and it’s essential to retain the employee based on the employee’s high or unique qualifications or a special need of the OPDIV.  Evidence of need may be based on:

a.	The unique or high qualifications of the employee or the special need for the employee’s skills that makes it essential to retain him/her.

b.	The extent to which the employee’s departure would affect the OPDIV's ability to carry out an activity or perform a function that is deemed essential to the Agency’s mission.

2.	OPDIV managerial staff may consider the following criteria in deciding the amount of the Student Loan Repayment:

a.	Salary levels reported in published salary surveys for comparable non-Federal positions.


b.	Salary documented in a competing job offer (if available).

c.	The criticality of the position and the effect on the OPDIV if the employee were to leave.

d.	The projected cost of recruitment and training associated with replacement of the employee.

e.	Employee’s tenure with the OPDIV.

f.	Budget availability.

D.	Requests for Student Loan Repayment.  

1.	OPDIV managers/supervisors recommending an employee for a SLRP must document in writing each approval of student loan repayment benefits.  The written determination must show the employee (or job candidate) meets the criteria specified in paragraphs B or C above. An authorized official must approve SLRP in connection with a recruitment action before the job candidate actually enters on duty in the position for which he or she was recruited.

2.	OPDIV managers/supervisors must review the “Request for Student Loan Repayment Program Under the Student Loan Repayment Program” document (see Appendix 1).  Appendix 1 should be filled out each year the employee is receiving SLRP.  Each year (if applicable), the OPDIV circles the corresponding year under “Student Loan Repayment Benefit for Year Number,” and update the other information.  Further, OPDIV must have employees sign a service agreement (see paragraph E below) and Appendix 3, “Student Loan Repayment Program, Outstanding Loan Information Request.”

E.	Service Agreements

1.	Before a loan repayment may be made, the employee must sign a Student Loan Repayment Program Service Agreement (see Appendix 2) acknowledging the requirement to serve a 
minimum of three years with the OPDIV, regardless of the amount of repayment authorized.  This three-year period commences at the beginning effective date specified in the service agreement.  The commencement date shall not be (1) earlier than the date the service agreement is signed by the approving official; or (2) earlier than the date the individual begins serving in the position for which he or she was recruited, if SLRP is being approved to recruit a job candidate.  Any additional repayments made during this three-year period do not extend the service agreement.  However, if additional payments are made after the initial three-year agreement has been completed, the service agreement will be extended by one year for each payment made beyond the 3rd year.  The extended service agreement period begins when the first payment beyond the 3rd year is made to the holder of the loan.  

2.	The agreement may also specify employment conditions considered appropriate, e.g., employee’s position and the duties he/she is expected to perform, work schedule, or expected level of performance.  The service agreement in no way constitutes a right, promise, or 
entitlement for continued employment or noncompetitive conversion to the competitive service, nor does it limit management’s right to take corrective or disciplinary actions as otherwise appropriate.     

3.	Periods of leave without pay, or other periods during which the employee is not in a pay status, do not count toward completion of the required service period.  Thus, the service completion date must be extended by the total amount of time spent in non-pay status.  However, as 

provided by 5 CFR 353.107, absence because of uniformed service or compensable injury is considered creditable toward the required service period upon reemployment.

4.	An employee who voluntarily leaves the OPDIV or is separated involuntarily because of performance, misconduct, or a negative suitability determination under 5 CFR part 731 and fails to complete the agreed-upon period of service must refund the full amount of benefits received during the initial three-year period.  Employees who fail to complete the period of service under an extension period, (e.g., 4th year, 5th year) must repay the amount of the benefits received in the extension year only.  If an employee fails to reimburse the OPDIV, the amount outstanding will be recovered from the employee under established debt collection procedures.

