
550-1-80 	NIGHT PAY DIFFERENTIAL, HOLIDAY PAY, SUNDAY PAY

A.	Night Pay Differential is pay for nightwork. Nightwork is regularly scheduled work performed by an employee between the hours of 6 p.m. and 6 a.m.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, an employee who performs nightwork is entitled to pay for that work at his or her rate of basic pay plus a night pay differential amounting to 10 percent of his or her rate of basic pay..  
1.	Night pay differential for GS employees is 10 percent of their scheduled pay rate regardless of grade.  This pay differential is paid for any regularly scheduled work performed between    6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
2.	Night pay differential is paid in addition to overtime, Sunday, or holiday premium pay payable under this section and is not included in the rate of basic pay used to compute premium pay for Sunday work or premium pay for holiday work.  For FLSA exempt employees, night pay differential is not included in the rate of basic pay used to compute overtime pay.
3.	Care must be taken to distinguish between irregular or occasional overtime work at night and a temporary change in a daily tour of duty. An employee may be temporarily assigned to a daily tour of duty that includes night work. In this circumstance, the employee is entitled to a night pay differential, even when the scheduling of the assignment occurs within the administrative workweek.
4.	An employee with a total amount of paid leave of eight hours or more during a pay period, day or night, cannot earn a night pay differential for that leave period.
5.	By definition, intermittent employees work on an irregular or occasional basis without a prearranged work schedule.  As a result, these employees are not eligible for night pay differential.
6.	Night pay differential is not paid to an employee on a flexible work schedule solely because the employee elects a time of arrival or departure at a time when night pay is authorized.  However, General Schedule (GS) employees must be paid night pay for those hours that must be worked between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m. to complete an 8-hour tour of duty.  GS employees must also be paid night pay for all designated core hours worked between 6 p.m. and 6 a.m. and for any regularly scheduled overtime work between those hours.
B.	Holiday Premium Pay. Holiday Pay is pay for work performed on a holiday during hours which correspond to regularly scheduled hours of duty.
1.	Double time is the basic pay normally received for the holiday. Overtime work performed in excess of eight hours on a holiday is paid on the basis of time and one-half for full-time employees in accordance with 5 U.S.C. § 5542(a). An employee who is required to report for work on a holiday is paid for at least two hours, whether or not work is actually performed.
2.	Employees on fixed compressed schedules receive pay for work on a holiday not to exceed the number of hours of the compressed work schedule for that day. Hours in excess of scheduled work requirements for that day are paid at the overtime pay rate and in accordance with overtime pay rules. Employees on flexible schedules may not receive holiday pay for more than eight hours.
3.	Pay for work on a holiday for part-time employees is applicable only to their regularly scheduled tour of duty for the day on which the holiday occurs, provided that day is one of their scheduled work days. Work in excess of the employees scheduled tour of duty is paid at the basic rate, not to exceed eight hours. Work in excess of eight hours is paid at the overtime rate of pay.  Part-time employees do not receive holiday premium pay for work performed on an “in lieu of” holiday for full-time employees.
4.	All holiday work must be approved in advance and in writing. Each OPDIV is required to ensure that holiday premium pay (like overtime) is properly approved, recorded, and documented. Documentation must be maintained with time and attendance data for six years.
5.	Premium pay for holiday work is in addition to overtime pay or night pay differential, or premium pay for Sunday work payable under this section and is not included in the rate of basic pay used to compute the night pay differential or premium pay for Sunday work.  For FLSA exempt employees, premium pay for holiday work is not included in the rate of basic pay used to compute overtime pay.
C.	Sunday Premium Pay. Sunday premium pay (also referred to as Sunday pay differential) is paid to employees for non-overtime, regularly scheduled work when any part of that daily tour of duty is on a Sunday. Sunday premium pay is not authorized for intermittent employees.   
1.	A full-time or part-time employee is entitled to pay at his or her rate of basic pay plus premium pay at a rate equal to 25 percent of his or her rate of basic pay for each hour of Sunday work.
2.	Sunday must be a part of the employee's regularly scheduled tour in order for the employee to receive Sunday premium pay.
3.	Employees may not be paid Sunday premium pay for hours when the employee is on leave.  Section 624 of the Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 1999, provides that no funds shall be available for paying Sunday premium pay to any employee unless the employee actually performed work during the time corresponding to such premium pay.  This restriction on the payment of Sunday premium pay for employees who do not actually perform work on Sunday includes General Schedule and prevailing rate (wage) employees. The restriction is no longer limited to funding from appropriations Acts, but applies to funding from any Act.
4.	An employee is not entitled to Sunday premium pay while engaged in training, except when the employee is given training during a period of duty for which he or she is already receiving premium pay. This exception does not apply to an employee assigned to full-time training at institutions of higher learning.
5.	Sunday premium pay is not paid for overtime hours, only for the regularly scheduled tour hours. Sunday premium pay hours begin at 12:01 a.m., Sunday morning, and continue until 12 midnight, Sunday night. If an employee's regular schedule starts at 12:01 a.m. Monday, that employee does not earn Sunday premium pay. If any part of the daily tour of duty falls on Sunday, the entire tour for that day is considered to be Sunday work. For example, if an employee works 8 hours during a basic tour of duty that begins on Saturday and ends on Sunday, and also works 8 hours during a basic tour of duty that begins on the same Sunday and ends on Monday, the employee is entitled to 16 hours of Sunday premium pay.
6.	Premium pay for Sunday work is in addition to overtime pay, premium pay for holiday work, or night pay differential payable under this section and is not included in the rate of basic pay used to compute premium pay for holiday work or night pay differential.  For FLSA exempt employees, premium pay for Sunday work is not included in the rate of basic pay used to compute overtime pay.
