550-1-00     PURPOSE

The purpose of this policy is to state Departmental policies and provide guidance concerning premium pay. Premium pay supplements base pay for work performed as stipulated in this policy. 

550-1-10         REFERENCES

A.	5 USC, Chapter 55, Subchapter V (Premium Pay)
B.	5 USC, Chapter 61, Subchapter II (Flexible and Compressed Work Schedules)
C.	5 CFR, Part 550 [Pay Administration (General)  Subpart A – Premium Pay]
D.	5 CFR, Part 550 [Pay Administration (General)  Subpart I – Pay for Duty Involving Physical Hardship or Hazard]
E.	5 CFR, Part 551 (Pay Administration under the Fair Labor Standards Act)
F.	5 CFR, Part 610 (Hours of Duty)
G.	Fathauer v. United States, 566 F.3d 1352 (Fed. Cir. 2009)
H.	HHS Guide to Timekeeping 
I.	HHS collective bargaining agreements


550-1-20	COVERAGE AND EXCLUSIONS

A.	Coverage
	This policy covers those persons defined as employees under 5 USC, Section 5541(2) including General Schedule (GS) employees.  

B.	Exclusions
	This policy does not apply to the following employees:
1.	GS, GP, or GR employees compensated under Title 38;
2.	Firefighters entitled to Fire Fighters Premium Pay;
3.	Federal Wage System employees;
4.	Senior Executive Service;
5.	Student Stipend employees
Note:  Policies governing compensatory time for religious observances and compensatory time off for travel are excluded from this Instruction.

550-1-30         GENERAL DEFINITIONS

A.	Administrative workweek. Any period of seven consecutive days (most typically Sunday through Saturday) designated in advance by the head of the OPDIV.
B.	Administratively uncontrollable work. See Section 550-1-70.A.
C.	Biweekly Pay Limitation. A cap on basic and premium pay during a pay period limiting pay to the greater of the biweekly rate payable for (1) GS-15, step 10 (including any applicable locality payment or special rate supplement), or (2) the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule; whichever is greater.
D.	Call-Back Overtime. See Section 550-1-50.C.
E.	Compensatory Time Off. See Section 550-1-50.B.
F.	Criminal Investigator. A Criminal Investigator is a law enforcement officer whose position is properly classified under either the GS-1811 or the GS-1812 series in the General Schedule classification system.
G.	Duty involving physical hardship. Duty that may not in itself be hazardous, but causes extreme physical discomfort or distress and is not adequately alleviated by protective or mechanical devices. Physical hardship duties may involve exposure to extreme temperatures for a long period of time, arduous physical exertion, or exposure to fumes, dust, or noise that causes nausea, skin, eye, ear, or nose irritation.
H.	FLSA exempt/non-exempt employee.  The Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, as amended, provides minimum standards for both wages and overtime entitlements and administrative procedures by which covered worktime must be compensated.  Employees are designated as FLSA exempt or non-exempt.  FLSA exempt means that the employee is not covered by the minimum wage and overtime provisions of the Act, while FLSA non-exempt means that the employee is covered by those provisions of the Act.  More information can be found in 5 CFR, Part 551, Subpart B.
I.	Hazardous duty. Duty performed under circumstances in which an accident could result in serious injury or death, such as duty performed on a high structure where protective facilities are not used or on an open structure where adverse conditions such as darkness, lightning, steady rain, or high wind velocity exist.
J.	Hazard pay differential. See Section 550-1-90.A.
K.	Holiday Premium Pay. See Section 550-1-80.B. 
L.	Irregular or occasional overtime work. Overtime work that is not part of an employee's regularly scheduled administrative workweek. 
M.	Law Enforcement Availability Pay.  See Section 550-1-100.A.
N.	Night Pay Differential. See Section 550-1-80.A.
O.	Overtime. See Section 550-1-50.A.
P.	Physical hardship. Duty that may not in itself be hazardous, but causes extreme physical discomfort or distress and is not adequately alleviated by protective or mechanical devices, such as duty involving exposure to extreme temperatures for a long period of time, arduous physical exertion, or exposure to fumes, dust, or noise that causes nausea, skin, eye, ear, or nose irritation.
Q.	Premium Pay. The dollar value of earned hours of compensatory time off and additional pay authorized by the relevant statute and regulation for overtime, night, Sunday or holiday work; or for standby duty, administratively uncontrollable overtime work, or availability duty. This excludes overtime pay paid to Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) non-exempt employees and compensatory time off earned in lieu of such overtime pay.
R.	Preshift and Postshift Activity. See Section 550-1-50.D.
S.	Regular overtime work. Overtime work that is part of an employee's regularly scheduled administrative workweek.
T.	Regularly scheduled administrative workweek. The period within an administrative workweek during which the employee (including full-time and part-time) is regularly scheduled to work.  
U.	Regularly scheduled standby duty pay. See Section 550-1-60.A.
V.	Regularly scheduled work. Work that is scheduled in advance of an administrative workweek for purposes of establishing workweeks. The 40 hour work schedule and flexible or compressed work schedules are typical pre-scheduled work tours of duty. All work performed by an employee within the pre-scheduled work tour of duty is considered regularly scheduled work for premium pay and hours of duty purposes.
W.	Sunday Premium Pay. See Section 550-1-80.C.
X.	Tour of Duty.  The hours of a day (a daily tour of duty) and the days of an administrative workweek (a weekly tour of duty) that constitute an employee’s regularly scheduled administrative workweek.
Y.	Unscheduled Duty Hours. For the purposes of availability pay, unscheduled duty hours are those hours, during which a criminal investigator performs work, or is determined by the employing agency to be available for work, that are not: 
1.	Part of the 40 hour basic workweek of the investigator, or
2.	Regularly scheduled compensated overtime hours that were scheduled in advance of the investigator’s administrative workweek.
