550-11-60 Policy
General Provisions
OpDivs/StaffDivs must afford employees time off from work for personal religious observances provided the requesting employee meets the requirements for requesting such time off as discussed in this Instruction. Although this policy provides for compensatory time off for religious observances, it does not preempt an employee from using other workplace flexibilities (i.e., annual leave, advanced annual leave, regular compensatory time off, alternative work schedule, and leave without pay (LWOP)) to accommodate their need to abstain from work due to a personal religious observance. A manager, supervisor, or other Department official may not coerce or require that an employee use these other workplace flexibilities in lieu of compensatory time off for religious observances.
Religious compensatory time off is distinct from other forms of compensatory time off because its exclusive purpose is to adjust the employee’s work schedule to accommodate a personal religious observance.
Religious compensatory time off for work performed is credited on a time-for-time basis. An employee earns religious compensatory time off when he or she works an equal amount of overtime prior or subsequent to being absent from his or her scheduled tour of duty in order to meet a personal religious requirement.
OpDivs/StaffDivs must approve an employee’s request for religious compensatory time off unless an appropriate official within the division has determined that approval would interfere with the employing component’s ability to carry out its mission efficiently. Supervisors (or their designees) may not make judgments as to the credibility of the employee’s religious beliefs or call into question the employee’s religious affiliation.
If an employee’s request to earn or use RCTO is denied, an appropriate official within the employing component must provide a written explanation for denying the request. All denials must be in writing whether or not the employee’s request is in writing or oral, and a copy of the denial given to the employee. Approvals and disapproval of employees’ requests should comport with merit system principles.
Relationship to Premium Pay and Overtime
Hours worked to earn RCTO provide a time off credit in lieu of any pay that would otherwise be payable for that work. As such, the premium pay provisions of 5 C.F.R. part 550, subpart A and section 7 of the Fair Labor Standards Act (see 5 C.F.R. part 551) do not apply to the overtime worked in exchanged for religious compensatory time off. Accordingly, employees have no entitlement to premium pay for the overtime worked in exchange.
RCTO should not be considered when applying the premium pay limitations of 5 C.F.R. § 550.105, Bi-weekly maximum earnings limitation; § 550.106, Annual maximum earnings limitation; and § 550.107, Premium payments capped on a bi- weekly basis when an annual limitation otherwise applies.
Employee Requests for Time Off
An employee seeking to use religious compensatory time off must submit to his or her immediate supervisor (or designee) a written request in advance of the requested period of absence. The request must include the information contained in § 5-11- 50(C)(3) of this Instruction.
To allow for appropriate scheduling of the employing component’s work, all written requests must be submitted to the appropriate official no later than the first day of the pay period immediately preceding the pay period in which the employee’s absence will occur.
The request may be in the form of a letter, memorandum, email addressed to the supervisor or designee, or any other documentable form prescribed by the OpDiv/StaffDiv. Although employees may initially make an oral request for the time off, a written request, as set forth by this Instruction, must be submitted as soon as practical after an oral request is approved.
In the event a change to the date(s) and or time(s) of planned period of overtime work is necessary due to an unforeseen circumstances, the employee must submit for approval a revised schedule to reflect the changes as soon as practicable.
Division Review and Decision on Requests
It is the Department’s policy to grant employee religious compensatory time off unless the adjustment to work schedules unduly interferes with the employing unit’s ability to efficiently accomplish its mission.
The supervisor (or designee) will not determine whether an employee’s belief is a discernible or correct interpretation of a religious creed. It is sufficient that the employee’s sincerely held personal religious beliefs cause the individual to feel an obligation that he or she should be absent from work for a religious observance.
Supervisors (or designees) should endeavor to provide the employee with an opportunity to work the overtime hours that will be exchanged for religious compensatory time off before or after the time is taken. The employee must simultaneously schedule his or her request for RCTO and the time he or she plans to work overtime to make up the approved RCTO. Furthermore, in light of the recovery procedures discussed in § 550-11-60 (E), supervisors (or designees) must make reasonable efforts to allow an employee to work overtime before the specified deadline (i.e., up to 13 pay periods before the religious observance) to cover advanced religious compensatory time off.
