
550-3-50	POLICY
A.	Creditable Travel Time.  Employees must be credited with CTT status if the employee is required to travel away from the official duty station and the travel time is not otherwise compensable hours of work under other legal authority.
B.	Travel Status
1.	Time in a travel status includes time an employee actually spends traveling between the official duty station and a temporary duty station or between two temporary duty stations and the “usual” waiting time that precedes or interrupts such travel.  There may be other circumstances in which travel time is compensable which should be examined and approved on a case basis by the appropriate OPDIV or designee. 
2.	Travel between home and a temporary duty station outside the limits of the employee’s official duty station is creditable as time in a travel status.  However, the normal home-to-work or work-to-home commuting time must be deducted from the creditable travel hours.
3.	In situations where employees are permitted to use an alternate mode of transportation other than the mode of transportation offered, or travel at a time or route other that the time or route selected by their organization, the lesser of the estimated time in a travel status or the actual time in a travel status must be credited.          
4.	For employees who are on multiple-day travel assignments who choose not to use temporary lodging at the temporary duty station and return home at night or on a weekend, only the travel from home to the temporary duty station on the first day and travel from the temporary duty station to home on the last day is qualifying as time in a travel status subject to the deduction of normal commuting time, unless an exception is approved by an authorized designated official.
However, employees may receive credit for travel to and from home on other days if the authorizing official in his or her discretion, determines that there is a net savings to the Government from reduced lodging costs considering the value of lost labor time attributable to CTT.   
5.	Travel time between home and a transportation terminal (e.g., airport or train station, etc.) outside the limits of an employee’s official duty station and outside his/her regular working hours is creditable as time in a travel status subject to a deduction for the time an employee would have spent in a normal home-to-work or work-to-home commute.
6.	The following scenarios are not creditable as time in a travel status:
a)	Time spent at a temporary duty station between arrival and departure; 
b)	 “Unusual” or extended waiting time between actual periods of travel when an employee is free to rest, sleep, eat, or otherwise use the time for his or her own purposes;  
c)	Travel between home and a transportation terminal (e.g., airport or train station, etc.) within the limits of an employee’s official duty station and outside the employee’s regular working hours to or from the terminal is considered to be commuting time;  and
d)	Travel in conjunction with the performance of union representational duties.
C.	Limitation.  There is no limit on the number of hours an employee may accrue as CTT.

550-3-60	PROHIBITIONS
A.		Employees must not receive payment under any circumstances for any unused CTT earned under the provisions of this Instruction.  This prohibition includes payments to surviving beneficiaries in the event of an employee’s death.
B.		Accrued CTT under this Instruction must not be considered in applying premium pay limitations or the established aggregate limitations on pay.  
C.		Permanent Change of Station (PCS) travel is not considered time in a travel status for the purpose of earning CTT.
D.		OPDIVs may not restore an employee’s forfeited “use or lose” annual leave as a result of an employee’s decision to use his or her CTT in lieu of his or her annual leave.
E.		Criminal investigators who are receiving availability pay for the same period of time as would be credited under CTT may not also earn CTT.
F.		Employees who receive administratively uncontrollable overtime (AUO) pay for the same period of time as would be credited under CTT may not also earn CTT.
550-3-70	FORFEITURE OF UNUSED CTT
A.		When an employee voluntarily transfers to another agency including a promotion or change to lower grade action all unused CTT must be forfeited.
B.		When an employee separates from Federal Service all unused CTT must be forfeited, except in the following circumstances:
1.	An employee separates and returns to service with HHS after completing an obligation to serve in the uniformed services;
2.	An employee returns to work after an on-the-job injury with entitlement to compensation through the Workers Compensation Program; or
3.	An employee fails to use his/her accrued CTT before the end of the 26th pay period during which it was earned due to an exigency of the service beyond the employee’s control.  
4.	However, an employee must use all of the CTT accrued by the end of the 26th pay period following the pay period in which he/she returns to duty, or the CTT will be forfeited.
C.	When an employee moves from a covered Federal position to a position not covered by this Instruction (see Section 550-3-10 of this Instruction), he or she forfeits all unused CTT.  
D.		Exceptions.  When a covered HHS employee moves to another covered position at another HHS organization, all unused CTT is transferred to the employee for use at the new or gaining organization.
