
C.	Call-Back Overtime. Call-back overtime occurs when employees are required to return to work after leaving the work site or to perform overtime work on a day for which they are not scheduled to work.
1.	A minimum of two hours overtime is credited, even though the employee may perform no work after returning to the work site. It is possible to have several call-backs in a 24-hour period. Each call-back is individually payable until the aggregate pay for FLSA exempt employees totals the biweekly pay limitation. (There is no maximum pay limit for FLSA non-exempt and wage grade employees.)
2.	Because call-back work is irregular/occasional overtime work, compensatory time off may be substituted for overtime pay at the employee's request. The employee receives a minimum of two hours compensatory time per call-back.
3.	Call-backs on a holiday are paid at the holiday rate for hours which correspond to the employee's regularly scheduled work time. Outside these hours, call-backs are paid at the authorized overtime rate of pay.  
D.	Preshift and Postshift Activity. Preshift activity is a preparatory activity an employee performs prior to the commencement of the employee’s principal activities. Postshift activity is a concluding activity an employee performs after the completion of the employee’s principal activities.
Employees who perform preshift or postshift activities outside their daily scheduled tour of duty must be compensated with irregular or occasional overtime, if all of the following criteria are met:
1.	The preshift or postshift activity is closely related to the employee’s principal activities and is indispensable in the performance of the principal activities;
2.	The preshift or postshift activity requires a time of more than 10 minutes (i.e., at least 11 minutes) per daily tour; and
3.	The time period for the preshift or postshift activity has to be scheduled by an official with authority to approve irregular or occasional overtime. The overtime credited must not exceed the time scheduled.

550-1-60 	REGULARLY SCHEDULED STANDBY DUTY PAY

A.	Regularly scheduled standby duty pay is approved premium pay on an annual basis for an employee in lieu of regularly scheduled overtime, night, holiday, and Sunday pay. It is sometimes referred to as standby duty premium pay, standby premium pay, or standby pay.
B.	Standby duty premium pay is appropriate when an employee is required to remain at, or within the confines of, a duty station longer than ordinary periods of duty, a substantial part of which consists of remaining in a standby status rather than performing work. Standby duty includes periods of time during which no work is performed while the employee is waiting for an event to occur which will require his/her attention.  The pay covers both non-work and work times.  In contrast, employees who are "on call" are paid only when they perform work; if called to work, they receive call-back overtime.
C.	Standby duty pay may be paid at a rate between 5% and 25% (as determined in accordance with the requirements in 5 CFR 550.144) of that part of the employee’s rate of basic pay which does not exceed the minimum rate of basic pay for GS-10 (including any applicable locality pay or special rate of pay under 5 U.S.C. 5305 or similar provision of law). Because standby duty pay is premium pay, it is subject to the biweekly maximum limitation on premium pay. 
D.	Standby duty is associated with an employee's regularly assigned duties. The hours during which standby duty is required must be included in the employee’s tour of duty.  This tour of duty must be established on a regularly recurring basis over a substantial period of time.  The result is that standby pay becomes basic pay and the extra pay earned is creditable for retirement and life insurance purposes only; it is not basic pay for overtime purposes. Because of this effect, OHROs must issue a Standard Form 50, Notification of Personnel Action, for every employee authorized regularly scheduled standby pay.
E.	Premium pay for standby duty is in lieu of all other premium pay, including regularly scheduled overtime, holiday pay, night pay differential, and Sunday premium pay.  However, standby duty pay is not in lieu of irregular or occasional overtime that is authorized and ordered in excess of the regularly scheduled standby duty.  Employees on standby duty may be paid overtime or receive compensatory time for irregular or occasional overtime work.
F.	An employee whose standby duty includes a holiday is still on standby duty during the holiday. The employee must be excused from work on the holiday when he/she is not needed that day. If the employee is absent during the holiday and has not been excused because (s)he is not needed that day, the employee must be charged annual leave, sick leave, leave without pay, or absence without leave, as appropriate.

550-1-70 	PAY FOR ADMINISTRATIVELY UNCONTROLLABLE WORK

A.	Administratively uncontrollable work (AUW) is work in which the hours of duty cannot be controlled administratively and which requires substantial amounts of irregular or occasional overtime work, with the employee generally being responsible for recognizing, without supervision, circumstances which require the employee to remain on duty.
B.	AUW is paid on an annual basis determined by a percentage of the employee’s rate of basic pay and the average number of hours a week of irregular or occasional overtime work. Premium pay is determined as an appropriate percentage, not less than 10 percent nor more than 25 percent, of the employee’s rate of basic pay.
