Accrual and Use of Time Off
While there is no limit on the number of hours an employee may earn and use for RCTO, employees may not accumulate more time off than is needed to accommodate an approved request for religious compensatory time off. An employee may only accumulate the amount of overtime necessary to cover the specific date(s) and time(s) for which he or she has submitted a request for religious compensatory time off.
If an employee does not use his or her earned religious compensatory time off as scheduled:
The unused time may be redirected towards a future religious observance that has been approved, even if the future observance is more than 13 pay periods after the compensatory time off was originally earned, regardless of any time limitations discussed below.
The employee may not earn any additional religious compensatory time off until the unused time is used or unless the need for additional time is established and documented.
As a general rule, religious compensatory time off may be earned up to 13 pay periods in advance of using the time off or within 13 pay periods following the use of RCTO. If a religious compensatory time off is used before earning it, then the 13 pay period time frame begins on the first day of the following pay period. For example, an employee used advanced religious compensatory time off in pay period 2. As such, the employee has 13 pay periods to earn the religious compensatory time off beginning pay period 3. If the employee’s absence spans more than one pay period, the pay period in which the last day of absence occurred is used to determine the first day of the pay period by which the employee must start working the overtime hours to recover the time owed.
When an employee, who was granted advanced religious compensatory time off (i.e., used, but not yet earned), fails to work the required overtime prior to the 14th pay period, the supervisor (or designee) should take immediate corrective action to recover the time owed. The supervisor (or designee) must charge the following paid time off accounts to recover the time in this order:
Compensatory time off in lieu of regular overtime
Time off awards
Compensatory time off for travel
Annual leave
Credit hours
To recover the time owed, each account must be fully exhausted before charging the next available account. Under no circumstances should the time owed be allocated among multiple accounts unless doing so is necessary because an account is fully exhausted.
If a negative balance results after charging the employee’s accounts as described above, the supervisor (or designee) must charge the employee leave without pay to resolve the deficit. Thereafter, the employee will be indebted for the monetary equivalent of the balance and the OpDiv/StaffDiv must initiate debt collection.
Unused time-off hours are not forfeited, but remain to the employee’s credit until used or the employee separates from federal service or transfers to another federal agency. Unused RCTO cannot be paid as overtime premium pay, provided as compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay, or converted to any other forms of time off.
Documentation and Records Retention
The employee must simultaneously schedule his or her request for RCTO and the time he or she plans to work overtime to make up the approved RCTO. This requirement provides a clear record of the employee’s adjusted work schedule. For each employee, the supervisor (or designee) must maintain records of the:
Name and/or description of religious observances for which time off is granted in accordance with this Instruction.
Dates and times requested for RCTO.
Dates and amount of RCTO earned and used.
RCTO records must be maintained for three (3) years from date of approval, see also Section 550-11-90, Documentation and Accountability.
550-11-70 When Employees Transfer to another Federal Agency or Separate from Federal Service
Employees who leave HHS, either to depart federal service or transfer to another federal agency, must be compensated for unused religious compensatory time off. The OpDiv/StaffDiv must use the hourly rate of the employee’s basic pay at the time the overtime was earned to compute the value of unused time and amount owed to the employee. Divide the employee’s annual rate of basic pay by 2,087 hours (2,756 hours for firefighters) to compute the employee’s hourly rate of basic pay.
Refer to § 550-11-60(E) for information on processing employees who leave HHS with a negative RCTO balance. Note: The debt collection process is different for employees separating from federal service. As such, the OpDiv/StaffDiv must ensure that deficits for separating employees are resolved prior to the employee’s last day with HHS.
550-11-80 Conflicts with Collective Bargaining Agreements
To the extent that existing collective bargaining agreements (CBA) contain provisions that are inconsistent with the either 5 U.S.C. §5550a or the provisions of the new OPM regulations (5 C.F.R. Part 550, subpart J), then those regulations supersede the conflicting provisions in the CBA as a matter of law. In these cases, those provisions of the CBA should be renegotiated and coordinated with the Assistant Secretary for Administration’s National Labor Relations division.
For a CBA that takes effect on or after the date the religious compensatory time regulations are published, regulatory provisions will supersede conflicting provisions in the CBA during any period of time following the applicable regulatory implementation date (i.e., May 29, 2019.)
CBA provisions that are consistent with the regulations remain in effect until the CBA provisions expire or are renegotiated.
OpDivs/StaffDivs are advised to consult with the National Labor Relations division for CBA impact determination.
550-11-90 Documentation and Accountability
Records should be retained to allow for third-party reconstruction. Records associated with personnel actions, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule. Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years. Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved, and closed.
HHS OHR will conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.