550-1-40 	RESPONSIBILITIES
A.	Office of Human Resources (OHR), Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA), is responsible for:
1.	Updating and maintaining this policy;
2.	Advising operating Human Resources organizations on the administration of premium pay;
3.	Coordinating HHS reports to the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) on the administration of premium pay;
4.	Reviewing OPDIV requests for exceptions to premium pay regulations; and
5.	Upon concurrence, forwarding such requests to OPM for official authorization for exceptions to premium pay regulations. 
B.	Operating Divisions (OPDIVs) are responsible for:
1.	Ensuring the compliance of the requirements of this policy within their respective organizations;
2.	Determining when a situation is an emergency which poses a direct threat to life or property; 
3.	Establishing a process to ensure that all requirements for authorizing premium pay are properly approved, recorded, and documented. Documentation must be maintained with time and attendance data for six years; and
4.	Submitting to Operating Human Resources organizations requests for exceptions to premium pay guidance.
C.	Operating Human Resources organizations (OHROs) are responsible for:
1.	Advising OPDIVs on the use of premium pay;
2.	Calculating the proper amounts for premium pay;
3.	Making determinations regarding the applicability and qualifications of specific situations and employees for hazard pay eligibility; and
4.	Reviewing OPDIV requests for exceptions to Premium Pay guidance and forwarding for consideration, when appropriate, to OHR. 
D.	Supervisors are responsible for considering and documenting their approval in advance, overtime work, compensatory time, and all other work resulting in premium pay compensation.
E.	Timekeepers are responsible for recording, documenting, and maintaining overtime usage records along with time and attendance data for six years.

550-1-50 	Overtime, Compensatory Time Off, Call-Back Overtime, Preshift and 
Postshift Activity

A.	Overtime. Overtime is work approved or officially ordered, and performed by an employee in excess of 8 hours a day or in excess of 40 hours in an administrative workweek.  
1.	The following are exceptions to the above rule:
a.	Employees who are authorized to work compressed workweeks receive overtime pay for work in excess of those specified hours that constitute the compressed schedule (i.e., over 8 hours if their scheduled day is an 8 hour day, over 9 hours if their scheduled day is a 9 hour day).
b.	Employees authorized to work flexible schedules and for whom credit hours are applicable receive overtime pay only for hours which are not credit hours.
2.	Overtime Pay. For employees with rates of basic pay equal to or less than the rate of basic pay for GS-10, step 1, the overtime hourly rate is the employee’s hourly rate of basic pay multiplied by 1.5. For employees with rates of basic pay greater than the basic pay for GS-10, step 1, the overtime hourly rate is the greater of (a) the hourly rate of basic pay for GS-10, step 1, multiplied by 1.5, or (b) the employee’s hourly rate of basic pay.
3.	Employees may not be compensated for overtime unless the work is authorized both in advance and in writing. In emergencies, employees may be ordered to work overtime without prior approval, provided approval is documented the next workday.
4.	For employees on non-reimbursable details outside the Department, OPDIVs must ensure that a clear understanding exists with the gaining organization with respect to when overtime may be worked and whether the cost of any overtime will be reimbursed.

B.	Compensatory Time Off. Compensatory time off is time off with pay in lieu of overtime pay for irregular or occasional overtime work; or, when permitted under agency flexible work schedule programs, time off with pay in lieu of overtime pay for regularly scheduled or irregular or occasional overtime work.
1.	At the request of an employee (FLSA exempt or non-exempt), the employee may be granted compensatory time off in lieu of irregular or occasional overtime work.
2.	Under an agency’s flexible work schedule program, at the request of an employee, the employee may be granted compensatory time off in lieu of an equal amount of overtime work, whether or not irregular or occasional in nature.
3.	Agencies may require that an FLSA exempt employee whose basic rate of pay exceeds GS-10, step 10 (including locality pay and any applicable special rate under 5 U.S.C. 5305) receive compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay for irregular or occasional overtime work.
4.	An employee must use accrued compensatory time off by the end of the 26th pay period after the pay period during which it was earned. 
5.	If accrued compensatory time off is not used by an employee within 26 pay periods, the employee must be paid for the earned compensatory time off.
6.	If an employee separates from Federal service, transfers to another Federal agency, or is placed in a leave without pay status due to performance of duties in a uniformed service or due to an on-the-job injury before the expiration of the 26 pay period time limit, the employee must be paid for the earned compensatory time off.
7.	Compensatory time is subject to the same maximum pay limitation as is overtime (see Section 550-1-110 E.)
8.	The dollar value of compensatory time off when it is paid, or for the purpose of applying pay limitations, is the amount of overtime pay the employee otherwise would have received for the hours of the pay period during which compensatory time off was earned by performing overtime work.
  
