HHS Instruction 550-11: Compensatory Time Off for Religious Observances
550-11-10 Purpose
This Instruction establishes the Department of Health and Human Services’ requirements regarding the accrual and use of compensatory time off for religious observances. Religious compensatory time off (RCTO) is granted to employees whose personal religious beliefs require the abstention from work during certain periods of time. Accordingly, employees may work overtime (see definition of overtime for purposes of RCTO, 550-11-40) and earn a special form of compensatory time off to make up for the time used in meeting personal religious requirements.

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

550-11-20 Authorities and References
5 U.S.C. § 5550a, Compensatory time off for religious observances - PDF
5 U.S.C. § 2105, Definition of employee - PDF
5 U.S.C. § 105, Definition of agency - PDF
5 C.F.R. part 550, subpart J, Compensatory Time Off for Religious Observances
84 FR 17931 (Apr. 29, 2019) - PDF
OPM Fact Sheet: Adjustment of Work Schedules for Religious Observances
EEOC Compliance Manual, Section 12
B–209327, 62 Comp. Gen. 589 (Jul. 26, 1983) - PDF
B-212486, (Oct. 31, 1983) (Comptroller General decision) - PDF
HHS Delegation of Human Resources Authorities, 2019
550-11-30 Coverage and Exclusions
This policy applies to all full-time and part-time HHS employees as defined in 5 U.S.C. § - PDF 2105,  - PDFwho have a scheduled tour of duty, including prevailing rate employees (WG, WL, WS), members of the Senior Executive Service (SES), experts and consultants appointed under 5 C.F.R. Part 304, and employees in senior-level (SL) and scientific or professional (ST) positions.
Intermittent employees and officers of the Commissioned Corps are not covered by this Instruction.
550-11-40 Definitions
Agency. An Executive department, a government corporation, or an independent establishment.
Employee. See 5 U.S.C. § 2105. (Note: The definition of employee used in 5 U.S.C. § 5541(c), affecting premium pay, does not apply for purposes of compensatory time off for religious observances.)
Overtime work. Work performed by an employee outside of his or her scheduled tour of duty for the purpose of making up time used for meeting personal religious requirements, as such term is explained in the definition of “religious compensatory time off” in this Instruction.  Overtime work also includes work performed by a part-time employee outside of his or her scheduled tour of duty, even if that work is below applicable overtime thresholds (e.g., below 40 hours in a week), and work an employee performs during (legal) holiday hours (within the employee’s scheduled tour of duty) during which the employee would otherwise be excused from duty.
Rate of basic pay. The rate of pay fixed by law or administrative action for the position held by an employee, including any special rate under 5 C.F.R. part 530, subpart C; locality rate under 5 C.F.R. part 531, subpart F; retained rate under 5 C.F.R. part 536; or similar rate under other legal authority before any deductions and excluding additional pay of any other kind. For example, a rate of basic pay does not include additional pay such as night shift differentials under 5 U.S.C. § 5343(f) or environmental differentials under 5 U.S.C. § 5343(c)(4).
Religious compensatory time off. Compensatory time off, as authorized by 5 U.S.C. 5550a, under which an employee whose personal religious beliefs require the abstention from work during certain periods of time may elect to perform overtime work in order to make up for time the employee takes off to meet those personal religious requirements. The religious requirements need not be officially mandated by a religious organization to which the employee belongs. It is sufficient that the employee’s personal religious beliefs cause the employee to feel an obligation that he or she should be absent from work for a religious purpose. An employee approved to perform overtime work under this subpart will be granted an equal amount of compensatory time off from his or her scheduled tour of duty (in lieu of overtime pay or other pay otherwise payable) to meet his or her personal religious obligations. For example, an employee who worked two hours of overtime to earn time off for personal religious obligations now has two hours that he or she can use for a past or future personal religious obligation (i.e., time for time basis.)
Scheduled tour of duty. The regular work hours in an established full-time or part-time work schedule during which the employee is charged leave or time off when absent.
550-11-50 Responsibilities
Assistant Secretary for Administration/Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR)
Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding pay consistent with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations;
Periodically reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv pay procedures and actions to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions (OpDivs/StaffDivs)
Provide oversight when determining whether an employee meets the statutory, regulatory, and policy requirements for earning and using religious compensatory time off.
Ensure employees who use or request RCTO have an opportunity to earn religious compensatory time off by performing overtime work.
Ensure that employees’ requests for time off are documented as set forth in this Instruction.
Ensure that all denials of an employee’s request are in writing and provided promptly to the employee.
Initiate debt collection when employees with a negative RCTO balance leave federal service or transfer to another federal agency.
Ensure that the religious compensatory time off authority is implemented in accordance with merit system principles.
Ensure that all required records related to the implementation and use of the religious compensatory time off authority are maintained in a manner conducive to audit.
Employees should be advised to:
Notify their supervisor of intent to use RCTO.
Submit a request for RCTO in advance of the religious observance to accommodate necessary scheduling changes without interfering with the organization’s ability to efficiently carry out its mission.
Provide the supervisor (or designee) with the following information at the time the religious compensatory time off is requested:
The name and/or description of the religious observance that is the basis of the employee's request to be absent from work in order to meet the employee's personal religious requirements;
The date(s) and time(s) the employee plans to be absent to participate in the religious observances; and
The date(s) and time(s) the employee plans to perform overtime work to earn religious compensatory time off to make up for the absence.
Submit a revised schedule to the supervisor (or designee) to reflect changes in the event an adjustment to the dates and times of planned overtime work is required due to unforeseen circumstances.
Submit a written request to the supervisor (or designee) as soon as practical after an oral request is approved.
