
550-1-90     HAZARDOUS PAY DIFFERENTIAL

A.	Hazardous pay differential. Hazardous pay differential is additional pay for the performance of hazardous duty and duty involving physical hardship. Efforts to avoid and protect employees from such hazards, physical hardships, or working conditions are of utmost priority. Pay differential should only be made where such exposure is unavoidable.
B.	Hazardous pay differential may not be more than 25 percent of the employee’s rate of basic pay. OHROs are responsible for making determinations regarding whether specific situations and the employee qualify for hazard pay differential. Determinations should be based on the position and justified in the evaluation statement. If the issue is not addressed in the documentation, the presumption is that hazardous duty pay is payable. Employee entitlement is recorded on the SF-50B, Notification of Personnel Action.
C.	Requests to designate additional hazardous duty exposure situations other than those identified in 5 CFR 550, Appendix A, Subpart I, should be submitted by the OPDIV Head through their OHRO for ASA/OHR endorsement prior to submission to OPM for approval.

550-1-100   LAW ENFORCEMENT AVAILABILITY PAY

A.	Law Enforcement Availability Pay. Law Enforcement Availability Pay (LEAP) is pay to compensate criminal investigators for unscheduled duty in excess of the 40 hour workweek based on the needs of the employing agency. It is paid only for periods of time during which the criminal investigator receives basic pay. LEAP is the lesser of: 
1.	Twenty (25%) percent of an employee’s basic rate of pay; or
2.	The biweekly pay limitation.

B.	LEAP is paid on an annual premium pay basis in lieu of standby duty pay, administratively uncontrollable overtime pay, and irregular or occasional overtime pay. Criminal investigators receiving LEAP may earn overtime pay for regularly scheduled overtime, excluding the first two hours of overtime work on any regular workday.
C.	The criminal investigator must meet the “substantial hours requirement” which is an annual average number of hours of unscheduled duty per regular workday of two hours or more. Unscheduled duty hours include hours not part of the 40 hour basic workweek of the criminal investigator and not a part of compensated regularly scheduled overtime hours.
D.	The criminal investigator must be determined to be generally and reasonably accessible to perform unscheduled duty based on the needs of the OPDIV. The criminal investigator and the supervisor must annually certify that he/she currently meets, and is expected to continue to meet, the “substantial hours” requirement.
550-1-110  	 PAY LIMITATIONS
A.	Biweekly pay. Biweekly pay is limited by the amount of premium pay that can be paid during a biweekly pay period. Premium pay cannot be paid to General Schedule employees (including law enforcement officers and other covered employees) which would cause an employee’s basic pay, overtime pay, the dollar value of compensatory time off, night pay, annual premium pay, Sunday premium pay, and holiday premium pay to exceed the greater of the biweekly rate for:
1.	GS-15, step 10 (including any applicable special salary rate or locality rate of pay); 
or 
2.	Level V of the Executive Schedule. 
B.	Emergency situations. The limitation for a pay period may be exceeded in emergency situations which pose a direct threat to life or property. OPDIVs have the authority to make emergency determinations. Even when an emergency determination is made, the annual maximum earnings limitation cannot exceed the greater of the annual rate (1) for a GS-15 (including any applicable locality payment or special rate supplement), or (2) for level V of the Executive Schedule in effect on the last day of the calendar year.
C.	Other.  The following types of premium pay remain subject to a biweekly limitation when other premium payments are subject to an annual limitation:
1.	Standby duty pay;
2.	Administratively uncontrollable overtime pay;
3.	Availability pay for criminal investigators
D.	Law enforcement officers. The maximum limitation is either 150 percent of the minimum rate for GS-15 or the rate for Level V of the Executive Schedule, whichever is less.
E.	Compensatory time. The biweekly pay limitation is also a ceiling on compensatory time off. Compensatory time off is merely an alternative form of payment for overtime work. An employee may not exceed the biweekly pay limitation by choosing compensatory time off as a substitute for monetary overtime pay.
1.	For FLSA-exempt employees, an employee's total biweekly pay (the basic pay plus premium pay, plus the compensatory hours earned, plus the compensatory hours balance already accrued which was carried over) cannot exceed the greater of the biweekly rate (1) for a GS-15, step 10 (including any applicable locality payment or special rate supplement), or (2) for level V of the Executive Schedule.
2.	At no time may the number of compensatory hours accumulate beyond the number that would allow the FLSA-exempt employee's biweekly pay to equal that of a GS-15, Step 10, employee. For FLSA non-exempt employees, the dollar value of compensatory time off when it is liquidated, or for the purpose of applying pay limitations, is the amount of overtime pay the employee otherwise would have received for the hours of the pay period during which compensatory time off was earned by performing overtime work.
550-1-120    DOCUMENTATION AND ACCOUNTABILITY

A.	Documentation

1.	For employees on non-reimbursable details outside the Department, OPDIVs must provide written documentation to the gaining organization regarding when overtime may be worked and whether the cost of any overtime will be reimbursed.
2.	Each OPDIV is required to ensure that premium pay is properly approved, recorded, and documented. Documentation must be maintained with time and attendance data for six years.
3.	Each OPDIV must maintain documentation of all determinations of emergency situations.
4.	OHROs must issue a Standard Form 50, Notification of Personnel Action, for employees authorized premium pay related to regularly scheduled standby pay, administratively uncontrollable work, and hazardous duty pay.  
5.	Supervisors will document all authorized overtime, holiday work, and standby pay in advance and in writing. All emergency work which is approved must be documented the next work day.

B.	Accountability
The OHR, OHRO, and OPDIV will conduct such oversight activities as required to ensure that premium pay is administered in accordance with law, regulations, and HHS policy and procedures.
