575-2-00	PURPOSE

This Instruction establishes Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) policy and procedures for the reimbursement of expenses to obtain professional accreditation, licenses, certifications and examinations and related expenses to obtain such credentials. On December 28, 2001, Congress amended Title 5 of the United States Code (5 USC) 5757 to give the head of an agency the flexibility to use appropriated funds or funds otherwise available to agencies to pay for licenses and credentials that relate to the mission, goals and objectives of that agency.  The law also allows agencies to pay bar examination and court admission fees in the interest of HHS mission objectives.

It should be noted, however, that this instruction does not address the use of appropriated funds to pay membership fees or dues in a society or association, or to pay expenses of attendance of an individual at meetings or conventions of members of a society or association.  These expenses are outside of the scope of this law and this instruction.

Agencies must use this authority consistent with the merit systems principles in Title 5 USC §2301 and consistent with any collective bargaining obligations.
575-2-10	REFERENCES 

A.	Defense Authorization Act for FY 2002 (Section 1112 of Public Law 107-107)

B.	5 USC § 5757 (payment of expenses to obtain professional credentials)

C.	5 USC § 5946 (membership fees, expenses for attendance at meetings, limitations)

D.	5 USC § 2105 (definition of employee)

575-2-20	COVERAGE AND EXCLUSIONS

A.	Coverage  

The provisions of this Instruction apply to full-time or part-time competitive or excepted service employees, which include:
1.	Senior Executive Service
2.	Senior Level or Senior Technical
3.	General Schedule (including GP and GR employees paid under Title 38)
4.	Prevailing Rate System (Federal Wage System)
5.	Title 42 (e.g., SBRS, 209(f), Service Fellows, etc.)

B.	Exclusions

1.	Employees occupying or seeking to qualify for appointment to any position that is excepted from the competitive service because of the confidential, policy determining, policy-making, or policy advocating character of the position (e.g., Schedule C appointees).
2.	Members of the Public Health Service Commissioned Corps.
3.	Employees serving on intermittent work schedules.
4.	Employees serving on time-limited appointments that are expected to last for 1 year or less.
5.	Employees whose most recent performance rating of record is less than Fully Successful.

575-2-30	DEFINITIONS

A.	Certification Program.   A program that involves a process in which individuals attain and demonstrate the level of knowledge and skill required to perform in the profession, occupation, or roles. Examples include Certified Public Accountant (CPA) or Project Management Professional (PMP).
B.	Licensure. A process by which a governmental authority grants permission to an individual practitioner or organization to operate or to engage in an occupation or profession. 
C.	Professional Accreditation.  A formal process by which a recognized body, usually a non-governmental institution, assesses and recognizes that an organization meets applicable, pre-determined standards.
D.	Professional credentials. Documents that attest to the truth of stated facts. For the purpose of this Instruction, professional credentials include professional accreditation, State-imposed and professional licenses, and professional certifications and registrations.

575-2-40      RESPONSIBILITIES

A.		Office of Human Resources (OHR), Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA), is responsible for:
1.	Updating and maintaining this policy;
2.	Advising Operating Human Resources Offices (OHROs) on the administration of this instruction.
B.	Operating Divisions (OPDIVs) are responsible for:

1.	Developing and implementing supplemental policies and procedures tailored to local requirements for the administration of this Instruction;
2.	Identifying all occupations and/or positions that require or may benefit from professional accreditation, licenses, certifications, and examinations in collaboration with the servicing OHRO;
3.	Submitting approved requests to their OHRO for certification before payment;
4.	Maintaining documentation on each request.   

C.	OHROs are responsible for:
1.	Assisting OPDIVs in identifying occupations and/or positions that require or may benefit from professional accreditation, licenses, certifications, and examinations;
2.	Verifying that employees are serving under covered appointments and providing certification for payment in accordance with OPDIV policy;
3.	Advising OPDIVs on the administration of this instruction. 

D.	Supervisors and Managers are responsible for:

1.	Providing information and assistance to employees on requests for reimbursement of professional credential expenses;
2.	Consulting with the OHROs on issues related to employee requests for reimbursement of professional credential expenses;
3.	Reviewing, denying, recommending approval or approving requests for reimbursement of payment of professional credential expenses fees in a timely manner in accordance with OPDIV established procedures.

E.	Employees are responsible for:

1.	Requesting approval for reimbursement of payment for professional credential expenses as soon as possible after such expenses are incurred;
2.	Providing all necessary information in a timely manner to the employee’s supervisor or manager to facilitate reimbursement of fees, including a completed SF 1164, Claim for Reimbursement for Expenditures on Official Business, and all supporting documentation.
