
The extent to which periods of time on detail, in a nonpay status, or in a paid leave status are creditable towards completion of the service period.
The consequence of both voluntary and management decisions to terminate service agreements (e.g., conditions under which the employee must repay any unearned portion of the incentive he or she may already have received).
A statement that the decision to terminate a service agreement may not be grieved or appealed.
AAOs must terminate recruitment incentives as warranted, ensure that payments are appropriately made or recovered when necessary, and the employee notified of the decision to terminate as provided in this subsection.
Agreements must terminate when an employee is demoted or separated for cause, receives a less than “Fully Successful” or equivalent rating of record, or otherwise fails to fulfill the terms of the service agreement. 
Agreements may be unilaterally terminated based solely upon management needs such as reduction-in-force or insufficient funds. 
An employee who fails to fulfill the service agreement is entitled only to payments that have already been received up to the amount attributable to completed service, unless the agreement states otherwise.  If the AAO unilaterally terminates the service agreement based solely upon management needs prior to the service period completion date, the employee is entitled to all incentive payments already received and any additional payments, if necessary, to provide payment in the amount attributable to completed service. 
Employees must reimburse the Department the sum of all benefits received under a service agreement that is in excess of the amount attributable to completed service.  In the event an employee fails to reimburse the Department for amounts owed, the outstanding amount shall be recovered from the employee under regulations for collection by offset from an indebted government employee under 5 U.S.C. § 5514, 5 C.F.R. pt. 550, subpart K, and 45 C.F.R. § 33.1 et seq. 
An employee must repay all payments attributable to a recruitment incentive when the service agreement is terminated due to an employee’s separation resulting from materially false or inaccurate statements, deception, or fraud in examination or appointment; or as a result of failing to meet employment qualifications.
In accordance with 5 U.S.C. § 5373(g) and 5 C.F.R. § 575.111(h), an AAO may waive recovery of the amount in excess of that attributable to completed service, if in the AAO’s judgment, collection would be against equity and good conscience and not in the best interest of the United States.  Under no circumstances can a waiver be granted when an employee is separated because of materially false or inaccurate statements, deception, or fraud in examination or appointment as prescribed in paragraph 5 of this subsection.  Payments for which collection is waived are deemed to be a valid.
The AAO must notify an employee in writing when the service agreement is terminated.
Employees cannot grieve or appeal any decision to terminate the service agreement.
Recruitment incentives are not a component of an employee’s rate of basic pay for any purpose.
Pursuant to 5 C.F.R. § 575.105(c), a recruitment incentive cannot commence during a period of employment established under any service agreement required for a:
Relocation incentive authorized in accordance with this Instruction and 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subpart B.
Retention incentive for which an employee receives payments with or without a service agreement authorized under this Instruction and 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subpart C.
575-1-60  Relocation Incentive and Service Agreements
An AAO may approve relocation incentives paid under this policy to a current federal employee who, without a break in service, must relocate to accept a position in a different geographic area, as defined in 5 C.F.R. § 575.205(b), that is mission critical and likely to be difficult to fill without such an incentive.  Relocation incentives are not retroactive and cannot be granted or approved after the employee enters on duty in the position in the new geographic area for which the incentive is being authorized.
The relocation incentive is payable only if the employee provides proof of residency in the new geographic area and maintains residency in the new geographic area for the entire service period as established by the agreement.
An AAO may approve relocation incentives whether the relocation is permanent or temporary. 
Prior to receiving any payment attributable to the relocation incentive, the employee must sign an agreement to complete a service period of not less than six months and no more than four years of employment with the OpDiv or StaffDiv, or successor organization in the event of a transfer of function, at the new duty station. 
An AAO may approve relocation incentives up to 25 percent of an employee’s annual rate of basic pay at the beginning of the service. 
The AAO will determine the percentage of the relocation incentive based on one or more of the criteria listed in paragraph K of this section.  The approved percentage will be multiplied by the number of years (including fractions of a year) in the service period not to exceed four years.
In accordance with 5 C.F.R. § 575.209(c)(1), OPM may waive the 25 percent limitation on relocation incentives based on a critical agency need and set the limitation up to 50 percent of an employee’s annual rate of pay at the beginning of a service period multiplied by the number of years (including fractions of a year) in the service period not to exceed two years.  In no event should the employee’s total relocation incentive exceed 100 percent of the employee’s annual rate of pay at the beginning of the service period.  AAOs will submit requests for waiver, through the OpDiv or StaffDiv head, to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources.  Each waiver request will provide the information prescribed in 5 C.F.R. § 575.209(c)(2). 
To be eligible for a relocation incentive, the employee must have a rating of record of at least “Fully Successful” or equivalent for the position held immediately before the move.
For group relocation incentives only.
An AAO may waive the requirement to make case-by-case determinations and approve group relocation incentives under the following conditions:
The employee is a member of a group of employees subject to a mobility agreement and relocation incentives are necessary to retain the group of employees to ensure continuation of operations.
A major organizational unit is relocated to a new duty station and the relocation incentives will ensure continued operations of that unit without undue disruption to operations or functions deemed essential to the division’s mission.
Decisions to approve a waiver for a group incentive must be supported by written determinations that specify the group of covered employees, the conditions under which the waiver is approved, and the period of time for which the waiver may be applied.
Relocation incentives must be approved by an AAO who is at least one level higher in the organization’s hierarchy than the employee’s (or group of employees’) supervisor unless there is no higher level in the OpDiv or StaffDiv.
In determining whether to grant an incentive, the AAO must consider:
Availability and quality of candidates possessing the competencies required for the position, including the success of recent efforts to recruit candidates for the position or similar positions using indicators such as offer-acceptance rates, proportion of positions filled, and the length of time required to fill similar positions.
Salaries typically paid outside the federal government for similar positions.