
Retention incentives must be approved by an AAO who is at least one level higher in the organizational hierarchy than the employee’s (or group of employees’) supervisor unless there is no higher level in the OpDiv or StaffDiv.
In determining whether to grant a retention incentive, the AAO must consider:
Objective need for retaining the services of the particular employee or group of employees.
Quality and availability of potential sources of employees who possess the competencies required for the position and who, with minimal training, cost, and disruption of service to the public, could perform the full range of duties and responsibilities of the employee’s position at the level performed by the incumbent.
Employment trends and labor market factors such as the availability and quality of candidates in the labor market possessing the competencies required for the position.
Success of recent efforts to recruit candidates and retain employees with competencies similar to those possessed by the employee for positions similar to the position held by the employee.
Special or unique competencies required for the position.
Efforts to use nonpay authorities to help retain the employee in lieu of or in addition to a retention incentive, such as special training and work scheduling flexibilities or improving working conditions.
Desirability of the duties, work or organizational environment, or geographic location of the position.
Extent to which the employee’s departure would impair the organization’s ability to carry out an activity, perform a function, or complete a project that the OpDiv or StaffDiv deems essential to its mission.
Salaries typically paid outside of the federal government.
Other supporting factors, including the strategies outlined in the organization’s succession plan for addressing the recruitment needs of the position.
Basis for determining the likelihood that the employee would leave federal service—the belief that the employee may leave federal service if a retention incentive is not granted must be justifiable.  Examples include a bona fide offer of employment or an affidavit signed by the employee attesting to a bona fide offer of employment, indicating the position and salary being offered, the name and location of the prospective employer, and the anticipated start date for the new position.
For group retention incentives only.
The AAO must consider the factors enumerated in paragraph K of this section as they relate to a group of employees—
With unusually high or unique qualifications or that the division has a special need for the employees’ services that make it essential to retain the employees in the group.
That it is reasonable to presume that there is a high risk that a significant number of employees in the targeted group would be likely to leave federal service in the absence of a retention incentive.
Before authorizing a group incentive, the AAO must narrowly define the targeted group using factors that relate to the conditions described in paragraph (1) of this subsection.  Appropriate factors may include:  occupational series, grade level, distinctive job duties, unique competencies required for the position, assignment to a special project, minimum service requirements, organization or team designation, geographic location, required record of rating, and any other factors deemed essential by the organization.
Each decision to pay a retention incentive must be documented.  The written justification must include:
The basis for determining that the unusually high or unique qualifications of the employee (or group of employees) or a special need of the agency for the employee’s (or group of employees) services makes it essential to retain the employee(s).
The basis for determining that the individual employee or a significant number of a targeted group of employees would be likely to leave the federal service in the absence of a retention incentive.
The basis for establishing the amount of the retention incentive.
The basis for establishing the timing of the approved retention incentive payment.
The basis for establishing the length of the service period.
Retention incentives may be paid in a single lump-sum payment after the completion of the full service period, in installments after the completion of specified periods of service, or in biweekly payments.
AAOs may not approve the payment of a retention incentive as an initial lump-sum payment at the start of a service period or as an installment paid in advance.
Single lump-sum payments paid upon completion of the service period are derived by multiplying the retention incentive percentage rate established for the employee (or group of employees) by the total basic pay earned by the employee during the full service period.
An installment payment is derived by multiplying the rate of basic pay the employee earns in the installment period by the percentage established for the employee by the AAO.
Installments may be paid after the completion of specified periods of service using variable percentages for each installment.  If this method is used, the organization must pay the accrued but unpaid portion of the retention incentive as part of the final payment upon completion of the service agreement.
Service agreements are not required for retention incentives paid in biweekly installments unless the incentive is granted under the provisions of paragraph H of this section or the employee received a reduced percentage for each installment made prior to the final payment.
Service agreements required for retention incentives must contain the following:
The period of service (in months and years) and total amount of the incentive agreed to by the employee.
The actual beginning and ending dates of the service period.  The service period must begin on the first day of a pay period and terminate on the last day of a pay period.
The retention incentive percentage rate, the method of payment, and if paid in installments, the method of installment payments (i.e., equal percentage rates or reduced percentage rates per installment with a final lump-sum payment of the accrued but unpaid amount of the incentive).
The conditions under which the AAO must terminate the service agreement (i.e., if an employee is demoted or separated for cause, receives a rating of record of less than “Fully Successful” or equivalent, otherwise fails to fulfill the terms of the service agreement, or when conditions change such that the original determination to pay the retention incentive no longer applies).
The terms or conditions that may result in termination of the service agreement (e.g., insufficient funds, reassignment to a different type of position, or any additional terms that if violated by the employee will result in termination of the agreement).
The consequence of both voluntary and management decisions to terminate service agreements (e.g., conditions under which the employee must repay any unearned portion of the incentive he or she may already have received).
Employees cannot grieve or appeal any decision to terminate payments for a retention incentive whether or not a service agreement is required.
AAOs must terminate retention incentives paid with or without a service agreement as warranted, ensure that payments are made appropriately, and the employee notified of the decision to terminate the incentive as provided in this subsection.