
575-1-50  Recruitment Incentives and Services Agreements
An AAO may approve recruitment incentives paid under this policy for a newly appointed employee to a position that is critical to the mission of the organization and is likely to be difficult to fill without an incentive.  Determinations to pay the incentive must be made and approved before the prospective employee enters on duty.  Recruitment incentives are not retroactive and cannot be granted or approved after the employee enters on duty.
Prior to receiving any payment attributable to the recruitment incentive, the employee must sign an agreement to complete a required service period of not less than six months and no more than four years of employment with the OpDiv or StaffDiv, or a successor organization in the event of a transfer of function.
An AAO may approve recruitment incentives up to 25 percent of an employee’s annual rate of basic pay at the beginning of the service period.
An AAO will determine the percentage of the recruitment incentive based on one or more of the criteria listed in paragraph H of this section.  The approved amount, up to 25 percent, will be multiplied by the number of years (including fractions of a year) in the service period not to exceed four years.
OPM may waive the 25 percent limitation on recruitment incentives based upon a critical agency need and set the limitation up to 50 percent of an employee’s annual rate of pay at the beginning of a service period multiplied by the number of years (including fractions of a year) in the service period not to exceed two years.  In no event should the employee’s total recruitment incentive exceed 100 percent of the employee’s annual rate of pay at the beginning of the service period.  An AAO will submit requests for waiver, through the OpDiv or StaffDiv head or designee, to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources.  Each waiver request must provide the information prescribed in 5 C.F.R. § 575.109(c)(2).
For group recruitment incentives only.
An AAO may target groups of similar positions identified as difficult to fill, establish criteria in advance for offering recruitment incentives to all newly appointed employees in the target groups, and authorize an official who is not lower than a candidate’s supervisor to discuss a potential recruitment incentive (in any amount within a preestablished range) to a candidate.  Group incentives may not be paid to employees in SL, ST, or SBRS positions, employees appointed as SES noncareer employees, employees in Executive Schedule positions, or employees in similar categories for which payment of recruitment incentives has been approved by OPM.
The targeted group of employees must be defined using factors that relate to the conditions described in paragraph H of this section.  Factors that may be appropriate include:  occupational series, grade level, distinctive job duties, unique competencies required for the position, and geographic location.
AAOs must review the decision to target a group of similar positions for the purpose of granting a recruitment incentive and certify, in writing, that the targeted positions are still likely to be difficult to fill.  If the AAO determines the positions are no longer likely to be difficult to fill, the OpDiv or StaffDiv must terminate the recruitment incentive to the newly appointed employees in that group on a group basis.
Recruitment incentives must be approved by an AAO who is at least one level higher in the organization’s hierarchy than the employee’s (or group of employees’) supervisor unless there is no higher level in the OpDiv or StaffDiv.
In determining whether to grant a recruitment incentive, the AAO must consider:
Availability and quality of candidates possessing the competencies required for the position, including the success of recent efforts to recruit candidates for the position or similar position using indicators such as offer-acceptance rates, proportion of positions filled, and the length of time required to fill similar positions.
Salaries typically paid outside the federal government for similar positions.
Recent turnover in similar positions.
Employment trends and labor market factors that may affect the organization’s ability to recruit candidates for similar positions.
Special or unique competencies required for the position.
Organization efforts to use nonpay authorities, such as special training and work scheduling flexibilities, to resolve difficulties alone or in combination with a recruitment incentive.
Desirability of the duties, work or organizational environment, or geographic location of the position.
Other supporting factors.
Positions may be considered to meet the eligibility criteria listed above if OPM has approved the use of a direct-hire authority for the position (or group of positions) under 5 C.F.R. pt. 337, subpart B.
Each determination to pay a recruitment incentive must be documented.  The written justification should include the determination that the position is likely to be difficult to fill in the absence of the incentive; the supporting factors used to authorize the incentive; the reasons for determining the amount and timing of the payments; and the reasons for determining the length of the service period.
The OpDiv or StaffDiv will pay recruitment incentives as specified in the employee’s service agreement.  The incentives may be paid by any of the following methods:
In a lump sum at the beginning of the service period stated in the agreement.
In equal or variable installment payments throughout the service period.
As a final lump-sum payment at the end of the specified service period.
The recruitment incentive (either as a lump sum or as the first of a series of installment payments) may be paid to an employee who has not yet reported to duty once he or she has signed a service agreement.
Service agreements for recruitment incentives must contain:
The period of service (in months and years) agreed to by the employee and the total amount authorized for payment.
The actual beginning and ending dates of the service period.  The service period must commence on the first day of an employee’s service with the organization and end on the last day of a pay period—except when the employee:
Begins work other than the first day of the pay period, the service period will begin on the first day of the next pay period.  If the first day of a pay period is a holiday, the effective date of the employee’s appointment and other paperwork is the Tuesday immediately following the holiday.
Is required to complete a probationary period or an initial period of formal training, the employee’s service period may be delayed until the beginning of the pay period following the completion of the probationary or training period. Because the AAO must approve the recruitment incentive before the employee enters on duty, the service agreement also must specify that there is no obligation to pay any portion of the incentive if the employee does not successfully complete the probationary period or training.
The method of payment and, if paid in installments, the date and amount of each installment payment.
The conditions under which the AAO must terminate the agreement (i.e., if an employee is demoted or separated for cause, receives a rating of record of less than “Fully Satisfactory” or equivalent, or otherwise fails to fulfill the terms of the service agreement).
The terms or conditions that may result in termination of the service agreement (e.g., insufficient funds, reassignment to a different type of position, or any additional terms that, if violated by the employee, will result in termination of the agreement.  If there are any such additional terms, they must be stated in the agreement.)  See 5 C.F.R. § 575.110-11