Instruction 575-1: Recruitment, Relocation and Retention Incentives



575-1-10  Purpose and Authority
Purpose:  This Instruction is promulgated in accordance with the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) regulations found at 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subparts A-C governing recruitment, relocation, and retention incentives.  It incorporates revisions to the regulations up to and effective as of September 13, 2013.  As required, the Department has established this plan to govern the use of this incentive authority by its divisions.
Authority:  This Instruction is authorized by:
Section 101 of the Federal Workforce Flexibility Act of 2004
5 U.S.C. § 5753-54
5 C.F.R. pts. 530 and 575
575-1-20  Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage:  Employees appointed or placed in the following categories or positions are eligibleto receive recruitment, relocation, and retention incentives:  General Schedule (GS); senior-level (SL) or scientific or professional (ST) position paid under 5 U.S.C. § 5376; Senior Executive Service (SES) paid under 5 U.S.C. § 5383 as career appointees; law enforcement officers (LEOs); Executive Schedule paid under 5 U.S.C. § 5311-17; prevailing rate positions; certain employees appointed under Title 42 of the U.S. Code; positions for which a waiver for an incentive greater than 25 percent has been approved by OPM; or any other position in a category for which payment of an incentive has been approved by OPM at the request of the head of the employing agency, or for which OPM has extended eligibility, such as the Senior Biomedical Research Service (SBRS).
Exclusions:  The following types of employees are excluded from receiving incentives for recruitment, relocation, and retention.
Employees in positions to which the individuals are appointed by the President, either by and with the advice and consent of the Senate or without the advice and consent of the Senate.
Employees in positions in the Senior Executive Service as noncareer appointees (as defined in 5 U.S.C. § 3132(a)(7)).
Employees in positions excepted from the competitive service by reason of their confidential, policy-determining, policy-making, or policy-advocating nature.
Members of the Public Health Service Commissioned Corps.
Agency heads or those expected to receive an appointment as an agency head (i.e., those appointed to other positions in anticipation of subsequent approval to be appointed as the agency head).
Employees appointed pursuant to Title 42 of the U.S. Code, except 42 U.S.C. § 209(f)-(g) appointees, members of the SBRS, and other employees to the extent permitted by laws, regulations, and governing authorities.  (AAOs are encouraged to confer with OHR to verify which Title 42 employees are eligible.)
575-1-30  Definitions
Recruitment Incentive:  An incentive paid to a newly appointed employee if it has been determined that the position is critical to the mission of the organization and is likely to be difficult to fill in the absence of such an incentive.
Relocation Incentive:  An incentive paid to a current federal employee who must relocate to accept a position in a different geographic area (at least 50 miles or more) if it has been determined that the position is critical to the mission of the organization and is likely to be difficult to fill in the absence of such an incentive.  Although the payment of relocation incentives is payable only to current federal employees, relocation allowances or “expenses” may be paid to current or newly appointed employees in accordance with General Services Administration, Federal Travel Regulation, Chapter 302, Relocation Allowances.
Retention Incentive:  An incentive paid to a current federal employee if it is determined the unusually high or unique qualifications of the employee or a special need of the organization for the employee’s services in a position critical to the mission of the organization make it essential to retain the employee, and the employee would be likely to leave the federal service in the absence of a retention incentive.  An incentive is also allowable to retain an employee or group of employees when a general or specific notice of closure or relocation has been announced and they are essential to retain for mission requirements and are likely to leave for a different position in the federal service in the absence of a retention incentive.
Newly Appointed Employee
An individual receiving his or her first appointment, regardless of tenure, as an employee of the federal government.
An appointment of a former employee of the federal government following a break in federal government service of at least 90 days from a previous appointment.
To the extent not otherwise excluded an appointment when the employee’s federal service during the 90 day period immediately preceding the appointment was not in a position excluded by 5 C.F.R. § 575.104 and was limited to one or more of the following:
A time-limited or nonpermanent appointment in the competitive or excepted service.
Employment with the Washington, D.C. government when the candidate was appointed to that position on or after October 1, 1987.
Appointment as an expert or consultant under 5 U.S.C. § 3109 and 5 C.F.R. pt. 304.
A provisional appointment.
Employment under an Internship Program pursuant to 5 C.F.R. § 213.3402(a).
Employment as an SES limited appointee or limited emergency appointee (as defined in 5 U.S.C. § 3132(a)(5)-(6)).
Certain nonappropriated fund employees—e.g., an employee in a nonappropriated fund instrumentality (NAFI) position meeting the definition of a prevailing rate position in 5 U.S.C. § 5342(a)(3) as long as the position is not otherwise excluded by 5 C.F.R. § 575.104, 575.204, and 575.304 and if appointment in the position to which the incentive is being granted occurs after at least a 90-day break in federal service.  (AAOs are encouraged to confer with OHR to verify if an NAFI employee is an eligible recipient.)
Authorized Agency Official (AAO):  As provided in the Department’s delegation of authority, the OpDiv or StaffDiv head or an official to whom the division head has redelegated the authority, in writing.  Except in cases where the OpDiv or StaffDiv head is the immediate supervisor of the employee receiving the incentive, at all times the AAO must occupy a position that is at least one level higher in the organizational hierarchy than the immediate supervisor of the employee receiving the incentive.
Rate of Basic Pay:  Rate of pay fixed by law or administrative action for the position to which an employee will be appointed before deductions and including any special rate or locality pay.  This does not include pay of any other kind such as night or environmental differentials, or Physicians’ Comparability Allowance (PCA).  Incentive payments are not a component of basic pay for any purpose.
Aggregate Pay Limitations:  Unless otherwise permitted by statute, regulation, or other governing authority, for GS and SBRS employees, payment of these incentives is subject to the aggregate limitation on pay in a calendar year, which may not exceed the rate of pay of Level I of the Executive Schedule (5 C.F.R. § 530.202).  For SES, SL, and ST employees, payment of these incentives is subject to the aggregate limitation on pay in a calendar year, which may not exceed the rate payable to the Vice President at the end of the calendar year.  (Note:  Whenever certification of HHS’s SES performance management system is pending OPM approval, SES employees are limited to the aggregate limitation on pay in a calendar year that may not exceed the rate of pay of Level I of the Executive Schedule).
