
Recent turnover in similar positions.
Employment trends and labor market factors that may affect the organization’s ability to recruit candidates for similar positions.
Special or unique competencies required for the position.
Organization efforts to use nonpay authorities, such as special training and work scheduling flexibilities, to resolve difficulties alone or in combination with a recruitment incentive.
Desirability of the duties, work or organizational environment, or geographic location of the position.
Other supporting factors.
Positions may be considered to meet the eligibility criteria above if OPM has approved the use of a direct-hire authority for the position (or group of positions) under 5 C.F.R. pt. 337, subpart B.
Each determination to pay a relocation incentive must be documented.  The written justification must include:
The basis for determining that a position is likely to be difficult to fill based upon the factors enumerated in paragraph K of this section.
The basis for authorizing the incentive for an employee.
The basis for the total amount of the incentive.
The basis for the timing of the approved incentive payments.
The basis for the length of the required service period.
Affirmation that the employee’s new position is in a different geographic area—i.e., the worksite of the new position is located 50 miles or more from the worksite of the position held immediately before the move or affirmation that the 50-mile requirement was waived and justification for the waiver.
Affirmation that the employee established a residence in the new geographic area.
The OpDiv or StaffDiv will pay relocation incentives as specified in the employee’s service agreement.  The incentives may be paid by any of the following methods:
In a lump sum at the beginning of the service period stated in the agreement.
In equal or variable installment payments throughout the service period.
As a final lump-sum payment at the end of the specified service period.
Service agreements for relocation incentives must contain the following information:
Definition of the boundaries of the new geographic area to which the employee must relocation.
Statement that the employee is required to maintain residency in the new geographic area for the duration of the service period established in the agreement.
The period of service (in months and years) agreed to by the employee and the total amount authorized for payment.
The actual beginning and ending dates of the service period.  The service period must begin on the first day of an employee’s service date at the new duty station and end on the last day of a pay period—except if the employee:
Begins work other than on the first day of the pay period, the service period will commence on the first day of the next pay period.  If the first day of a pay period is a holiday, the effective date of the employee’s appointment and other paperwork is the Tuesday immediately following the holiday.
Is required to complete an initial period of formal training or probationary period, the employee’s service period may be delayed until the beginning of the pay period following the completion of the training or probationary period.  Because the AAO must approve the relocation incentive before the employee enters on duty at the new duty station, the service agreement also must specify that there is no obligation to pay any portion of the incentive if the employee does not successfully complete the probationary period or training.
The method of payment.  If paid in installments, the date and amount of each installment payment.
The conditions under which the AAO must terminate the agreement (i.e., if an employee is demoted or separated for cause, receives a rating of record of less than “Fully Successful” or equivalent, otherwise fails to fulfill the terms of the service agreement, or fails to maintain residency throughout the service period required by the agreement).
The terms or conditions that may result in termination of the service agreement (e.g., insufficient funds, reassignment to a different type of position, or any additional terms that if violated by the employee will result in termination of the agreement).
The extent to which periods of time on detail, or in a nonpay or paid leave status is creditable toward completion of the service period.
The consequence of both voluntary and management decisions to terminate service agreements (e.g., conditions under which the employee must repay any unearned portion of the incentive he or she may already have received).
A statement that the decision to terminate a service agreement may not be grieved or appealed.
AAOs must terminate relocation incentives as warranted, ensure that payments are appropriately made or recovered when necessary, and the employee notified of the decision to terminate the incentive as provided in this subsection.
Agreements must terminate when an employee is demoted or separated for cause, receives a less than “Fully Successful” or equivalent rating of record, otherwise fails to fulfill the terms of the service agreement, or fails to maintain residency in the new geographic area at any point during the service period established by the agreement.  Under these circumstances, the employee is entitled to retain relocation incentive payments previously paid by the OpDiv or StaffDiv that are attributable to the completed service period. 
Agreements may be unilaterally terminated based solely upon management needs such as reduction-in-force or insufficient funds.  Under these circumstances, an employee is entitled to all relocation incentive payments attributable to completed service and to retain any portion of the incentive payment he or she has already received that is attributable to uncompleted service. 
In accordance with 5 C.F.R. § 575.211(f), the OpDiv or StaffDiv is not obligated to pay any amount not yet received by the employee that is attributable to completed service, unless the division agreed to do so in the service agreement.  But if the employee received relocation incentive payments in excess of the amount that is attributable to the completed portion of the service period, he or she must repay the excess amount.
To determine the amount attributable to completed service versus the amount that cannot be attributed to completed service, the total amount of the authorized relocation incentive must be prorated across the length of the service period.  5 C.F.R. § 575.211(i).
In the event that an employee fails to reimburse the Department for amounts owed, the outstanding amount will be recovered from the employee under regulations for collection by offset from an indebted government employee under 5 U.S.C. § 5514, 5 C.F.R. pt. 550, subpart K, and 45 C.F.R. § 33.1 et seq. 
In accordance with 5 U.S.C. § 5373(g) and 5 C.F.R. § 575.211(h), an AAO may waive recovery of the amount in excess of the amount attributable to completed service if in the AAO’s judgment, collection would be against equity and good conscience and not in the best interests of the United States.  Payments for which collection is waived are deemed to be a valid payment. 
The AAO must notify the employee in writing when a service agreement is terminated. 
Employees cannot grieve or appeal any decision to terminate the service agreement.
Relocation incentives are not a component of an employee’s rate of basic pay for any purpose. 
In accordance with 5 C.F.R. § 575.206(d), an OpDiv or StaffDiv may not commence a relocation incentive service agreement during a period of employment established under any service agreement required for a:
Recruitment incentive authorized under this Instruction and 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subpart A.