
Relocation incentive previously authorized under this Instruction and 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subpart B.
A relocation incentive service agreement may commence during a period of employment established under a service agreement for a previously authorized retention incentive or for which an employee is receiving previously authorized retention incentive payments without a service agreement pursuant to this Instruction and 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subpart C.  The service period for such a relocation incentive service agreement and the service period required by the previously authorized retention incentive service agreement must be fulfilled concurrently.  5 C.F.R. § 575.206(e).  (Note:  This is the only circumstance for which simultaneous payments of multiple incentives or concurrent service agreements authorized pursuant to this Instruction and 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subparts A-C is permissible.)
575-1-70  Retention Incentive and Service Agreements
An AAO may approve a retention incentive paid under this Instruction to an individual employee who has unusually high or unique qualifications or when the organization has a special need for the employee’s services that makes it essential to retain the employee and the employee would be likely to leave federal service in the absence of an incentive.  An AAO may approve a retention incentive to a group of employees with unusually high or unique qualifications or when a special need for the employees’ service makes it essential to retain the employees in that group and there is a high risk that a significant number of the employees in the group would be likely to leave the federal service in the absence of a retention incentive.  Group retention incentives cannot be paid to employees in SL, ST, or Executive Schedule positions, or SBRS employees in similar categories for which payment of retention incentives has been approved by OPM. 
It is not intended that OpDivs and StaffDivs will use retention incentives as a long-term staffing flexibility.  Instead, the organization should have in place an effective succession plan for leadership and nonleadership positions, detailing its strategy to eventually eliminate or reduce the need for the use of a retention incentive.  Succession plans:
Must discuss the quality and availability of potential sources of employees who possess the competencies required for the position and who, with minimal training, cost, and disruption of service to the public, could perform the full range of duties and responsibilities of the employee’s position at the level performed by the incumbent.
May include future recruitment and training efforts, any changes in the distribution of workflow, the effectiveness of processes or measures that have been considered to retain the employee’s services without paying the incentives.
AAOs should ensure that succession plans are used to alleviate the need for long-term use of retention incentives.
AAOs must review, at least annually, all retention incentives, including those administered without a service agreement, against the factors enumerated in paragraph K of this section and certify in writing the decision to pay an incentive—thereby confirming that circumstances still warrant continued payment.
An AAO cannot approve a retention incentive prior to an individual’s employment with the OpDiv or StaffDiv. 
Prior to receiving any payment attributable to the retention incentive, the employee may be required to sign a service agreement for a specified period of employment with the OpDiv or StaffDiv, or a successor organization in the event of a transfer of function.  Service agreements are not required for retention incentives paid in biweekly installments if the biweekly installments are set at the full retention incentive percentage rate established for the employee.  But all retention incentives that require approval of a waiver by OPM must have a service agreement—there are no exceptions for this category of retention incentives.
An employee is eligible to receive an individual or participate in a group incentive only if the employee’s rating of record (or an official performance appraisal or evaluation under a system not covered by 5 U.S.C. ch. 43 or 5 C.F.R. pt. 430) is at least “Fully Successful” or equivalent.
Individual retention incentives may be up to 25 percent of an employee’s rate of basic pay.  Group retention incentives may be up to 10 percent of an employee’s rate of basic pay unless the OpDiv or StaffDiv seeks a waiver in accordance with the provisions of paragraph H of this section.
In accordance with 5 C.F.R. § 575.309(e)(1), OPM may waive the limitations on retention incentives and set the limitation up to 50 percent of an employee’s annual rate of pay based upon a critical agency need.  Requests must be based upon determinations that the employee’s (or group of employees’) unusually high or unique qualifications are critical to the successful accomplishment of an important mission or project (e.g., programs or projects related to a national emergency or projects implementing a new law).  AAOs will submit requests for waiver, through the OpDiv or StaffDiv head, to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources or designee.  Each waiver request will provide the information prescribed in 5 C.F.R. § 575.309(e)(2). 
The AAO determines the percentage of the retention incentive, individual or group, based upon one or more of the criteria listed in paragraph K of this section.