
Service Agreement:  Unless otherwise provided by these Instructions, a written agreement that must be signed by an employee prior to receiving payment of any amount related to an incentive under this Instruction 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subparts A-C that requires completion of a specified period of employment.  (Note:  All incentives that require OPM approval, as explained in this Instruction and applicable sections of 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subparts A-C, must have a service agreement.)
Service Period Limitations:  The period of service required for an agreement approving a recruitment or relocation incentive cannot be less than six months nor more than four years.  If a service agreement has already exceeded the four-year time period, it shall terminate at the end of that current fiscal year.  (Note: A service agreement is not necessary for biweekly retention incentive payments, unless the incentive is one that required approval of a waiver request by OPM.)   Service periods begin on the first day of a pay period and end on the last day of a pay period.   
575-1-40  Responsibilities
The following officials and offices are responsible for administering this policy in accordance with the appropriate statutes and regulations.

ASA, Office of Human Resources (OHR)

The OHR is responsible for:
Updating and maintaining this policy.
Preparing and submitting periodic reports regarding usage of 3Rs incentives including the annual 3Rs report to OPM.
Monitoring the use of these incentives to ensure that payments are consistent with the requirements of this policy.
Publishing specific criteria applicable to documenting position criticality to the organization.
Reviewing and approving 3Rs waivers greater than 25 and up to 50 percent and submitting the request to OPM for final authorization.
Operating Divisions (OpDivs) and Staff Divisions (StaffDivs)

OpDivs and StaffDivs are responsible for:
Providing oversight as it relates to determining whether an employee meets the statutory requirements for receiving a recruitment, relocation, or retention incentive.
Ensuring that all AAOs have a written delegation of authority addressing the extent and limitations, if any, of powers applicable to the 3Rs incentives program.
Documenting the criteria used for determining the amount of an incentive payment, method of payment, length of a required service period, or termination of a service agreement.
Ensuring this policy is applied in a consistent manner when determining the length of service agreements for employees in similar circumstances.
Submitting all required documentation for authorization and payment of any incentive to their operating human resources center in order to assure regulatory and policy requirements are met prior to authorization of payment.
Recovering payments from an employee when payments attributable to an incentive create an indebtedness to the OpDiv or StaffDiv.
For multiyear service agreements, reviewing and certifying annually in writing on the service agreement that the recipient of the incentive continues to meet all requirements therein and continued payment of the incentive is within the division’s budgetary appropriations.
Notifying incentive recipients in writing whenever the incentive is terminated.
Operating Human Resources Centers:

Each operating human resources center is responsible for:
Establishing and maintaining documentation and records containing the justification and service agreement, if applicable, for each issuance of an incentive payment and making such documentation available for review and analysis upon request by the OHR or OPM.
Ensuring compliance with regulatory and policy requirements prior to processing the incentive request for payment.
Providing input to OHR, as required, for periodic or annual reporting requirements in the use of these incentives as required for accountability purposes.