
Retention incentives must terminate when an employee is demoted or separated for cause, receives a less than “Fully Successful” or equivalent rating of record, otherwise fails to fulfill the terms of the service agreement, or when conditions under which the original incentive was approved no longer applies.  Under these circumstances, the employee is entitled to retain retention incentive payments previously paid by the OpDiv or StaffDiv that are attributable to the completed portion of the service period.  And if the employee received retention incentive payments that are less than the amount attributable to the completed portion of the service period, the division is not obligated to pay the employee the amount attributable to completed service, unless the written service agreement states otherwise.
Retention incentive must be terminated when the employee moves to a different position.
Retention incentives must be reduced or terminated when payment at the level originally approved is no longer warranted.  Factors to consider include:
Amount, if any, necessary to retain the employee (or group of employees).
Availability of qualified candidates.
Budget conditions.
Other supporting factors.
Retention incentives may be unilaterally terminated based solely upon management needs, even if the conditions that gave rise to the original determination to pay the incentives still exist.  5 C.F.R. § 575.311(a)(2).  Under these circumstances, the employee is entitled to retain any retention incentive payments that are attributable to completed service and to receive any portion of a retention incentive payment owed by the division for completed service.  5 C.F.R. § 575.311(c).
When a retention incentive administered without a service agreement is terminated, the employee is entitled to receive any scheduled incentive payments through the end of the pay period in which the written notice is provided or until the date of separation, if sooner.
The AAO must notify the employee in writing when a retention incentive is terminated, whether or not there is a service agreement. 
Employees may not grieve or appeal any decision to terminate or reduce a retention incentive.
In addition to the consideration enumerated in paragraph P of this section, for retention incentives administered without a service agreement, the AAO must:
Review and certify in writing, at least annually, the decision to pay and confirm that circumstances still warrant continued payment.
Reduce or terminate the incentive when the conditions change such that the original determination to pay no longer applies or when payment is no longer warranted at the level originally approved or at all after considering whether:
A lesser amount or none at all would be sufficient to retain the individual or group of employees.
Labor market factors make it more likely (or reasonably likely) to recruit candidates with competencies similar to those possessed by the individual or group of employees.
The division’s need for the services of the individual or group of employees has been reduced to a level that makes it unnecessary to continue payment at the level originally approved or at all.
OpDivs and StaffDivs may begin payments of relocation incentives without affecting the payment of an existing retention incentive.
In accordance with 5 C.F.R. § 575.309(g), OpDivs or StaffDivs cannot commence an individual or group retention incentive service agreement or a group or individual retention incentive paid without a service agreement during a period of employment established under any service agreement required for the payment of a:
Recruitment and relocation incentive approved pursuant to this Instruction and 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subparts A and B.  (Note:  The distinction that is created in this subsection and paragraph R of § 575-1-60 is one of order of approval.  When warranted, it is permissible to approve a relocation incentive during the service period (i.e., after the approval) of a retention incentive.  It is impermissible, however, to approve a retention incentive during the service period (i.e., after the approval) of a relocation incentive.
Retention incentive for an individual or group of employees approved pursuant to this Instruction and 5 C.F.R. pt. 575, subpart C.
Retention incentives are not a component of an employee’s rate of basic pay for any purpose.
575-1-80  Documentation, Reporting, and Monitoring
Documenting.  Each OpDiv or StaffDiv approving a determination to pay an incentive shall document its decision in sufficient detail to justify the payment and permit reconstruction of the action.  The paperwork will be submitted to the Human Resources Center to review for sufficiency, adherence to this Instruction, and document retention.  This documentation must include a copy of the service agreement, the initial incentive determination, where necessary the employee’s rating for the previous performance period, and the following information:
The criteria used to determine the need for paying the incentive (including the need for advance determination) and how the criteria were applied.
The criteria used to determine the amount of the incentive and how the criteria were applied.
The qualifications of the employee in sufficient detail to demonstrate that he or she meets any special qualifications needed for the position.
The length of the service agreement and the criteria used to make that determination.
Upon approval, the Human Resources Center shall prepare an SF-50 to document payment of the incentive and file that document in the employee’s electronic Official Personnel Folder (eOPF).
Reporting.  OHR will prepare an annual report in accordance with OPM requirements.  Each report shall include:
The type of incentive.
Title, pay plan, series, and grade of the recipient.
Total number of employees paid a particular incentive by title, pay plan, series, and grade.
Total dollar amount paid for a particular incentive by title, pay plan, series, and grade.
A narrative discussion of the situations for which incentives were used, the effectiveness of the retention incentive authorities, and any recommendations for improving the use of the statutory authorities in terms of both regulatory change and Department requirements and flexibilities.
Monitoring.  OpDiv or StaffDiv must monitor the use of each incentive to ensure that its use is consistent with the requirements of the regulations and this policy.  If an OpDiv or StaffDiv fails to adhere to these requirements, its delegation to use the authority may be revoked, suspended, or withdrawn.