Instruction 590-1: Title 38 Physician and Dentist Pay (PDP)
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 590-1, Title 38 Physician, Dentist, and Podiatrist Pay, dated December 17, 2021.

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 590-1:  Title 38 Physician and Dentist Pay (PDP), dated January 1, 2016

Background:
This Instruction has been amended to reflect a change in the name of this program from Physician and Dentist Pay to Physician, Dentist, and Podiatrist Pay.  The acronym remains PDP.

Amended to reflect that Human Resource Directors have delegated authority to approve all Title 38 market pay proposals up to $350,000.  Approval for annual pay in excess of $350,000 is retained by the Assistant Secretary of Administration.

Addition of language that podiatrists are eligible to receive market pay.

Addition of medical specialty Podiatry (General) and Podiatry (Surgery-forefoot, refoot/ankle, advanced refoot/ankle), to pay table 1.  (Podiatrists became eligible for Market Pay effective, May 8, 2019.  The previous authorization before this effective date is revoked).

Addition of language that physicians receiving PDP are eligible to receive hazardous duty pay.  Hazardous duty pay is computed as a percentage of the employee’s GS base pay plus market pay.

Addition of language that physicians must have their pay reviewed at least once every 24 months.

Clarification that Title 38 physicians who receive market pay may be paid certain overseas allowances – foreign area COLA under 5 U.S.C. § 5924; post differential under 5 U.S.C. § 5925; and danger pay allowance under 5 U.S.C. § 5928).  Overseas allowances are computed as a percentage of the employee’s GS base pay plus market pay.

This issuance is effective immediately and must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out by HHS Operating and Staff Division HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/

Tia N. Butler
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
and Chief Human Capital Officer, Acting

590-1-00 Sections
590-1-10 Purpose
590-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
590-1-30 References
590-1-40 Definitions
590-1-50 Responsibilities
590-1-60 Policy
590-1-70 Documentation and Accountability
Exhibit A Delegation Authorities
Exhibit B OPDIV Physician, Dentist, and Podiatrist Tier Descriptions
Exhibit C Annual Pay Ranges for Physicians, Dentists, and Podiatrists

590-1-10: Purpose
This Instruction implements the Department of Health and Human Services regulations and procedures for Title 38 Physician, Dentist and Podiatrist Pay (PDP).

When provisions of this policy differ from applicable law or regulation, the law or regulation apply.

590-1-20: Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage:

The provisions of this Instruction apply to civilian physicians (0602), podiatrists (0668), and dentists (0680) (full-time, part-time, and intermittent) at GS-15 and below who:
Provide direct patient-care services, or services incident to direct patient-care services; and
Have been designated for coverage by appropriate legal authority.
As used in this document, the term “physician(s)” is used interchangeably to refer to a physician, podiatrist, and/or dentist.

Exclusions: This Instruction does not apply to individuals:
Currently serving in the Public Health Service (PHS) Commissioned Corps;
Serving in an internship or residency training program;
Senior Executive Service (SES), Executive Schedule (EX), Senior Level/Scientific (SL/ST), Senior Biomedical Research and Biomedical Product Assessment Service (SBRBPAS), executive level, or other senior-level systems;
Receiving Physicians Comparability Allowance (PCA) under 5 U.S.C. § 5948; or
Employed or paid under a Title 42 authority.
The provisions of this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment of bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71, and such actions require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees. When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
590-1-30: References
Public Law (P.L.) 93-638 - PDF, § 105 (Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act)
P.L. 99-221 - PDF, § 3(a) (Cherokee Leasing Act)
P.L. 116-12 - PDF, (Clarification of Grade and Pay of Podiatrists of Department of Veterans Affairs)
38 U.S.C chapter 74  (Veterans’ Health Administration - Personnel)
5 U.S.C. § 5371  (Health Care Positions)
5 U.S.C. § 5545(d)  (Night, standby, irregular, and hazardous duty differential)
U.S. Office of Personnel Management Title 38 Delegation Agreement with HHS, effective March 6, 2019-June 30, 2022
May 24, 2019 ASA Memo, Modification of HHS Instruction 590-1, Title 38, Physician and Dentist Pay, dated January 1, 2016
May 15, 2019 Acting DAS HR Memo, Revised Title 38 Delegation Agreement, clarifying PDP for podiatrists was not effective April 8, 2019.
OPM FAQs on Hazardous Duty Pay, see discussion under “Who Can Receive Hazardous Duty Pay,” and “Can Title 38 Employees Receive Hazardous Duty Pay”

590-1-40: Definitions
Aggregate Pay. The sum of all payments made to a physician in a calendar year, exclusive of lump sum annual leave, reimbursement of travel, back pay, and severance pay, which may not exceed the amount of annual compensation of the President of the United States specified in section 102 of title 3 of the United States Code (currently set at $400,000).
Annual Pay. The sum of the General Schedule (GS) base pay rate and market pay.  Annual pay is basic pay for purposes of computing civil service retirement benefits, lump sum annual leave payments, life insurance, thrift savings plan, work injury compensation claims, severance pay, recruitment, relocation and retention incentives, continuation of pay, and advances in pay.
Basic Pay. The rate fixed by applicable law or regulation. Basic pay does not include other types of pay such as: bonuses, allowances, overtime, holiday, and military pay or supplemental payments from the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP).
Base Pay.  Rate of pay before any applicable locality payment or special rate supplement is added.
Compensation Panel. A group of physicians responsible for the evaluation of physicians and for making recommendations to the approving official for annual pay.
Management Official. A person who has supervisory authority over staff or program management responsibility.
Market Pay. A component of annual pay intended to reflect the recruitment and retention needs for the specialty or assignment of a particular HHS physician.
Tier. A level within the annual pay range for an assignment or specialty.  Refer to Exhibit B of this Instruction for tier levels.
Total Compensation. The sum of all payments made to a physician including base pay, market pay, recruitment, relocation, and retention incentives, overseas allowances (i.e., foreign area COLA under 5 U.S.C. § 5924; post differential under 5 U.S.C. § 5925; and danger pay allowance under 5 U.S.C. § 5928), performance awards, or other cash awards.
