Market Pay
Each physician covered by this part is eligible for market pay.  Market pay is intended to reflect the recruitment and retention needs for the specialty or assignment of a particular physician at an HHS facility.  Physicians who receive Market Pay under 38 U.S.C. § 7431 (c) are no longer entitled to receive any locality payments under 5 U.S.C. § 5304 or special rate supplements under 5 U.S.C. § 5305 or 38 U.S.C. § 7455.  Physicians must have their pay reviewed at least once every 24 months.
At least once every two years, the Veterans Affairs (VA) Secretary prescribes nationwide minimum and maximum amounts of annual pay (base pay plus market pay) that will be paid under this paragraph.  These amounts are published in the Federal Register for not less than 60 days prior to the effective date.  The VA Secretary may prescribe different ranges for different specialties or assignments.  In determining pay ranges, at least two or more national surveys of pay for physicians are consulted.  National surveys consulted include data that describe overall physician income by specialization or assignment and benefits in broad geographic scope.
Pay ranges are located at Exhibit C of this Instruction.  If HHS has a physician, podiatrist, or dentist specialty not covered by one of the pay ranges established by the VA, HHS may (1) cover that specialty under an existing VA pay range or (2) establish a new pay range, consistent with the requirements for establishing pay ranges under 38 U.S.C. § 7431.  HHS will notify OPM and the Interagency Committee for Healthcare Occupations if it adds a new specialty to an existing VA pay range or establishes a new pay range and issue a Federal Register Notice as required by 38 U.S.C. § 7431 (e)(1)(c).
When the VA increases the nationwide minimum and/or maximum amounts of annual pay under this paragraph, physicians are not automatically entitled to a corresponding increase in their individual annual pay rates. Only physicians whose existing rate of annual pay falls below the newly prescribed nationwide minimum for their designated pay range will automatically receive an increase in market pay to make their annual pay rate equivalent to the new nationwide minimum. Compensation Panels review the market pay rates for individual physicians on a periodic basis.
In the event that the nationwide minimum and maximum amounts of annual pay are reduced under this paragraph, physicians already on HHS rolls will not experience a reduction in market pay.
There may be up to four tiers of annual pay for each specialty or assignment for which a separate range of pay has been approved.  Each tier reflects different professional responsibilities, professional achievements, or administrative duties.  See Exhibit B of this Instruction for the different tier levels.
The amount of market pay and appropriate tier for a particular physician is recommended to the approving official.
The determination of the amount of market pay of a particular physician shall take into consideration:
The level of experience of the physician in the specialty or assignment;
The need for the specialty or assignment of the physician at the facility;
The health care labor market for the specialty or assignment of the physician, which may cover any geographic area the OpDiv/StaffDiv considers appropriate for the specialty or assignment;
The board certifications, if any, of the physician;
The accomplishments of the physician in the specialty or assignment; and
Consideration of unique circumstances, qualifications or credentials, if any, and the comparison of these circumstances to the equivalent compensation level of non-HHS physicians in the local health care labor market.
Each OpDiv will establish one Compensation Panel that will be responsible for its PDP Program oversight and guidance.  These panels will ensure that there is consistency and appropriateness of pay determinations within the OpDiv and periodically review pay under the PDP Program.  All Compensation Panel recommendations are taken into consideration by the appropriate approving official.  The approving official determines the amount of market pay to be paid a physician after consideration of the range and tier recommended by the panel.  The approving official’s decision is final.
Exceptions to the Maximum of the Annual Pay Range
General
Except as provided in paragraphs S.1.b through S.1.d, and S.2, below, the annual pay for a physician may not exceed the maximum amount in the nationwide pay range prescribed by the Secretary of the VA for a specialty or assignment.
It is expected that the maximum amount in the nationwide pay range will meet most pay and staffing needs.  However, the OpDiv Head may grant an exception to the maximum on an individual, specialty or assignment, and/or facility-specific basis if such action is necessary to recruit or retain well-qualified physicians.
It is expected that the maximum amount in the nationwide pay range will meet most pay and staffing needs.  However, the OpDiv Head may grant an exception to the maximum on an individual, specialty or assignment, and/or facility-specific basis if such action is necessary to recruit or retain well-qualified physicians.
Exceptions to the maximum amount of a nationwide pay range are not required for physicians who will exceed the pay range due to a GS base increase under 5.U.S.C. 5303, promotion increase under 5334(b), within-grade increase under 5335, or quality-step increase under 5 U.S.C. 5336.  Physicians are not eligible for within-grade increases or quality step increases if their base pay is at the maximum of the GS rate range.
Criteria for Approval.  Each organization submitting a request for an exception to the maximum in the pay range for an individual, specialty or assignment, and/or facility-specific basis must demonstrate that a higher maximum is necessary to maintain adequate staffing.  Factors to consider include:
Exceptions to the Maximum Annual Pay Ranges
Higher Maximum Rates.  There is substantial evidence or anecdotal information that the maximum rates in the community are higher than the Department’s maximum rate for the specialty or assignment.  However, higher rates in the community may not be the sole basis for making a request for an exception to the maximum of the market pay range;
Other Criteria.  The organization may submit any evidence of staffing problems which seriously hamper or have the potential to seriously hamper its ability to recruit and retain physicians in the specialty or assignment.
Individual Exception to the Maximum of the Annual Pay Range
The individual should have outstanding qualifications in a medical or dental specialty or possess a unique combination of education and experience that meets a special need of the organization that may be project specific or critical to the HHS mission.
A discussion of what factors distinguish the individual when compared with other physicians with like length of service, specialty, or assignment; or a discussion of the rare combination of education and experience which the individual has and how it meets a special need of the organization or the mission of HHS.
Requesting Exceptions.  Requests for exceptions to the maximum of the nationwide pay range will be sent to the OpDiv head with a recommendation from the Compensation Panel.  Requests shall include the following:
The individual or specialty or assignment for which the exception is requested;
The amount of maximum pay requested;
The reasons for the request, including documentation specific to the criteria in paragraph S.2 above; and
Any other pertinent information.
590-1-70: Documentation and Accountability
Records, including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the according to the record disposition schedule.  Generally, records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years.
Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, or the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved and closed.
ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.
