590-1-50: Responsibilities
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide policy and guidance regarding PDP in accordance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Obtains the concurrence of the Interagency Committee for Health Care Occupations on the HHS PDP Policy when substantial changes are made.
Prepares the annual report of use of PDP as required by OPM.
Maintains an internal review program to monitor use of these provisions.  Provides OPM with program information and access to records upon request.
Periodically reviews Operating Division and Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv) procedures to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv/StaffDivs:
Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Ensure that merit system principles and the requirements of the Title 38 statute, the OPM-HHS delegation agreement, and this Instruction are followed in their use of PDP.
Delegated authority to approve all Title 38 market pay proposals up to $350,000.
OpDiv and StaffDiv Human Resources Centers (HR Centers):
Comply with this Instruction, and applicable federal laws and regulations.
Maintain auditable program records for 3rd party review.
OpDiv/Ethics Office:
Review requests for approval of outside work activities from physicians for possible conflict of interest with federal work obligations.
Approving Officials:
Comply with this Instruction, any HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Review and certify PDP requests comply with the provisions of law, the OPM and HHS delegation agreement, and this Instruction.
Consult when necessary with OpDiv/StaffDiv OHROs and Ethics Office for employees requesting approval of outside work activities.
590-1-60: Policy
Discretionary Application.  PDP is available for use to recruit and retain highly qualified physicians.  Payment of PDP is optional in each OpDiv.  (Throughout this Instruction, references to OpDiv Heads imply that authorities may be redelegated).
Within budgetary constraints, HHS policy is to compensate physicians at levels reasonably comparable with those paid to other federal sector physicians in the same local area.
Establishment of PDP Amounts.  PDP amounts for physicians will be established on an   individual basis according to GS base pay and market pay.  PDP does not include locality pay under the GS scale.  (See Section Paragraph R of this section, Market Pay, and Exhibit A, which describes approval authorities).
Relationship to Basic Pay.  PDP (annual pay) is basic pay for all benefits including retirement.
Relationship to Premium Pay under Title 5.  Physicians who receive PDP may not:
Be paid overtime for work in excess of 8 hours per day, 40 hours per week, or 80 hours per pay period;
Earn compensatory time off in lieu of overtime pay or compensatory time off for travel; or
Receive any other form of premium pay under 5 U.S.C. chapter 55, e.g., Sunday, holiday, night pays.
Hazardous Duty Pay (HDP).  Physicians at HHS are covered under Chapter 51 (Classification) of Title 5, U.S.C.  As such, physicians receiving PDP are eligible to receive hazardous duty pay.  However, if these employees are later classified under the Title 38 qualification-based grading system, they would not be eligible for HDP.  If approved, HDP is computed based upon the sum of the employee’s GS base pay plus title 38 market pay.
Overseas Allowances.  Physicians who receive market pay are also eligible for certain overseas allowances.  They may be paid:  Foreign area COLA under 5 U.S.C. § 5924; post differential under 5 U.S.C. § 5925; and danger pay allowance under 5 U.S.C. § 5928.  Overseas allowance is computed based upon a percentage of the employee’s GS base pay plus market pay.
Physicians receiving PDP will be covered by the HHS Performance Management Appraisal Program.
Other Discretionary Pay under Title 5.  Physicians who receive PDP may receive other forms of discretionary pay under Title 5, such as awards; and recruitment, relocation, and retention incentives (5 U.S.C. §§ 5753 and 5754).  However, they are not eligible to receive a Physicians’ Comparability Allowance (PCA) under 5 U.S.C. § 5948.  The sum of base pay and any discretionary pay that is paid to a physician under Title 5 authority, (e.g., cash awards, performance awards, recruitment, retention, and relocation incentives) is limited on an annual basis to the rate of pay for Executive Level I (EX-I).
Aggregate Compensation Limits.  Total compensation of physicians receiving PDP under Title 38 authority including, basic pay, market pay, and other supplemental pay under Title 5 cannot exceed the amount of annual pay received by the President of the United States as specified in 3 U.S.C. § 102.  In the event that the amount of compensation does exceed this amount, there will be no deferral of compensation and any excess will be forfeited, unless, specifically permitted by law.
Effective Dates.  PDP will usually be effective at the beginning of the pay period immediately following approval by the approving official or on a later date specified on HHS Form 691 - PDF, “Request for Title 38 Physician, Dentist, and Podiatrist Pay”, located on HHS Intranet Form Page.  PDP may not be approved retroactively; however, depending on the circumstances, an administrative error may be corrected retroactively. (PDP will be paid on a biweekly basis).
Outside Work.  Because of the work obligation associated with PDP, physicians who wish to perform outside work must submit a prior written request under established Department procedures.  Any activity interfering or conflicting with the employee’s federal work obligation will be disapproved.
Part-time Service.  Part-time physicians who have a tour of duty of at least 20 hours per pay period may be offered PDP.  Additionally, physicians who work an intermittent schedule are eligible for PDP.
Relationship to Leave under Title 5.  Physicians who receive PDP continue to be covered by the leave provisions of 5 U.S.C. chapter 63.
Credit Hours.  Physicians who receive PDP are eligible to accrue credit hours in accordance with 5 U.S.C. chapter 61.
Establishment or Changes to Pay.  Management officials proposing PDP must complete HHS Form 691 - PDF and provide:
A copy of the candidate’s/employee’s qualifications statement or curriculum vitae (CV),
The position description,
Written market pay justification,
Copy of medical license,
Copy of Board certification (if applicable), and
External Compensation Surveys.
Information listed in paragraph O above should be forwarded by the proposing official to the compensation panel for review and recommendation to the approving official for a decision.  The decision of the approving official is final.
Once approved, cases will be forwarded with supporting documentation to the servicing HR Center for:
Processing of a Notification of Personnel Action (SF-50); and
Maintenance of records in the employee’s Official Personnel Folder (OPF).  NOTE:  Maintain supporting documentation on the left side of the OPF.