
610-2-60	GENERAL PROVISIONS
A.	If there is no announcement, HHS employees are to assume that their work place is open each scheduled tour of duty regardless of any conditions that may develop.   Employees are also to assume that they are expected to report for duty on time and remain throughout their scheduled tour of duty unless they are on previously approved leave.  Employees working on shifts are to operate on these same assumptions unless they are notified that their specific shifts are affected.
B.	All employees are expected to report to work and depart from work at their regularly scheduled times in spite of weather conditions and traffic and transportation disruptions, unless an Administrative Order or dismissal is issued by an authorized official.  Each employee is expected to take whatever steps are necessary (e.g., leaving home early or using public transportation rather than a personal car) to cope with disruptive conditions.
C.	The authority to close the work place is to be used sparingly and only for short periods of time not to exceed three (3) consecutive work days.  If it becomes necessary to exceed the 3-consecutive day limitation, approval must be obtained from the ASAM or his/her designee. 
D.	Management officials must exercise sound judgment in determining when to close, how long to remain closed, and how much excused absence to approve.  Although the use of an unscheduled leave policy is encouraged during emergency situations, management may need to make exceptions to general procedures as circumstances warrant.  
E.	Annually, OPDIV Heads or their designees must advise all employees under their jurisdiction how closings will be handled due to severe weather conditions or other emergencies.  Annual notices should include the following: 
1.  What constitutes an official announcement;
2.  When possible, which television and radio stations will issue official announcements;
3.  What hours constitute the fixed work schedule;
4.  How shifts will be handled;
5.  How employees working AWS hours are affected;
6.  Usual wording of announcements and what that wording means;
7.  Anything else that will help employees know what to do when such situations occur.
F.	Administrative Orders may be issued orally but must be confirmed in writing to provide documentation and to justify excusing absences.
G.	When an Administrative Order is issued that authorizes a delayed arrival, non-emergency employees are expected to report for work in accordance with the Administrative Order.  Tardiness in excess of the authorized excused absence is generally charged to annual leave, compensatory time or credit hours earned. 
H.	In emergency situations, supervisors should be sensitive to the needs of disabled employees.  For example, snow removal equipment may make travel by mobility-impaired individuals even more difficult by creating insurmountable snow drifts at walkways.  Employees with the same disability may have different needs, and an employee’s needs may vary on different occasions, even under similar weather and environmental conditions.  
I.	Management must identify in writing individuals who are designated as mission critical emergency employees, and the conditions under which they are considered to be mission critical emergency employees and advise them of their status on an annual basis.  If management determines that a situation requires nonemergency personnel to report to or remain at work, OPDIV Heads or their designees must establish procedures for notifying affected employees.
J.	Occasionally, some individual employees may face special family situations that will not be covered by an announcement in the media or on OPM's web site (e.g., when employees are expected to report to work, but the schools opened late or are closed).  Management should notify employees of procedures to be followed when this occurs and should be flexible in approving excused absence or leave as appropriate, based on each unique situation. 

610-2-70	EXCUSED ABSENCES AND CHARGES TO LEAVE
A.	OPDIV heads or their designees are authorized to approve Administrative Orders for brief absences that do not exceed three (3) consecutive days consistent with OPM requirements and this Instruction.  They are likewise authorized to approve brief absences, that do not involve group dismissals or closures [generally up to one (1) work day], on a case by case basis when deemed appropriate.
B.	In general, when it is necessary for an official to issue an Administrative Order to close the work place temporarily, nonemergency employee absences are excused.  Exhibit A describes a variety of specific situations and their effect on charges to leave.  Officials must recognize that when they issue an Administrative Order authorizing an unscheduled leave policy during a temporary emergency, they are authorizing all employees, except those designated as emergency or mission critical emergency employees, to take annual leave or LWOP without prior approval from their supervisors.  While employees must notify their supervisors of their intentions to take unscheduled leave, supervisors may not deny that leave once an administrative order has been issued.  Therefore, authorized officials should be cautious in issuing administrative orders that permit the taking of annual leave or LWOP during temporary emergency situations.
C.	Employees on telework arrangements, who either work at home or at an alternate telework site, are generally required to remain in a duty status during a dismissal or closure at the official duty station.  This requirement must be documented in the employee’s telework agreement. However, an employee on telework may be excused during an emergency if the emergency adversely affects the employee’s ability to perform assigned work e.g., disruption of electricity, loss of heat, job requires close and constant contact with employees at the official worksite, etc.  However, telework employees who are required to work during their regular tour of duty when the workplace is closed or when others are allowed to arrive late or leave early are not entitled to receive overtime pay, credit hours, or compensatory time for performing work during their regularly scheduled hours.
610-1-80	  REPORTING AND ACCOUNTABILITY
OPDIV Heads are responsible for maintaining records containing the names of employees designated as emergency and mission critical emergency employees, copies of written notification to employees informing them of their designation, and the OPDIV’s expectations during a dismissal or closure.  In addition, records shall be maintained on all closures or dismissals, to include copies of Administrative Orders, timekeeping records documenting excused absences, and any other pertinent information. 
