
Types of Alternative Work Schedules
Compressed Work Schedule.   In the case of a full-time employee, an 80-hour biweekly basic work requirement that is scheduled for less than 10 workdays.  In the case of a part-time employee, a biweekly basic work requirement of less than 80 hours that is scheduled for less than 10 workdays.  Employees on a Compressed Work Schedule are not entitled to credit hours.  
OpDiv/StaffDivs are responsible for establishing the CWSs available for their OpDiv/StaffDivs and may choose to establish either, or both, or none of the following available CWS options:

Five day/four day compressed plan (5-4/9)
A full-time employee works eight 9-hour days and one 8-hour day for a total of 80 hours in a biweekly pay period.  The employee has one (1) day off each biweekly pay period.  The OpDiv/StaffDiv determines the number of hours each day a part-time employee must work in a 9-day biweekly pay period.
Four-day Work Week (4/10)
In the case of a full-time employee who works a four-day workweek, the employee must work 10 hours a day, 40 hours a week and 80 hours in a biweekly pay period.  In the case of a part-time employee who works a four-day workweek, the OpDiv/StaffDivs will determine the number of hours each day a part-time employee must work in a four-day workweek and the number of hours in a biweekly pay period.
Flexible Work Schedule.  In the case of a full-time employee, has an 80-hour biweekly basic work requirement that includes both 1) core hours; and 2) designated hours during which the employee may elect the time of such employee’s arrival at and departure from work. In the case a part-time employee, has a biweekly basic work requirement of less than 80 hours that includes both 1) core hours; and 2) designated hours during which the employee may elect the time of such employee’s arrival at and departure from work. For both full-time and part-time employees, the OpDiv/StaffDivs shall designate both 1) the core hours; and 2) the hours during which employees may elect to arrive at and depart from work. Employees on a flexible work schedule are entitled to credit hours.

OpDiv/StaffDivs are responsible for establishing the FWSs available for their OpDiv/StaffDivs and may choose to establish one, two, three, or all of the following available options, or may choose not to establish any of the following options:
Gliding Schedule:  A type of flexible work schedule in which a full-time employee has a basic work requirement of 8 hours in each day and 40 hours in each week, and may select a starting and stopping time each day, and may change starting and stopping times daily within the established flexible hours.  For example:
Image
Gliding Schedule: This graphic shows a gliding schedule with flexible hours at 7 to 9am and 3 to 6 pm, and core hours plus lunch period from 9 am to 3 pm. Customer Service Hours from 7:30 am to 4 pm.
Flexitour Schedule. A type of flexible work schedule in which an employee is allowed to select starting and stopping times within the flexible hours.  Once selected, the hours are fixed until the OpDiv/StaffDiv provides an opportunity to select different starting and stopping times. For example:
Image
Flexitour Schedule: This graphic shows a flexitour schedule with flexible hours at 6 to 9 a.m. and 3 to 5 p.m., and core hours plus lunch period from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m.
Variable Week Schedule.  A type of flexible work schedule containing core hours on each workday in the biweekly pay period and in which a full-time employee has a basic work requirement of 80 hours for the biweekly pay period, but in which an employee may vary the number of hours worked on a given workday or the number of hours each week within the limits established by the OpDiv/StaffDivs.  Below is an example of what a variable week schedule might look like.  The basic work requirement is 80 hours and the employee worked 2 credit hours.
Variable Week Schedule - Week 1

Image
Variable Week Schedule, Week 1: This graphic shows week 1 of a variable week schedule with core hours (plus lunch period) from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Hours worked: 10 on Monday, 9 on Tuesday, 10 on Wednesday, 8 on Thursday, and 8 on Friday for a total of 45 hours worked.
Variable Week Schedule - Week 2

Image
Variable Week Schedule, Week 2: This graphic shows week 2 of a variable week schedule with core hours (plus lunch period) from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Hours worked: 7 on Monday, 8 on Tuesday, 8 on Wednesday, 6 on Thursday, and 8 on Friday for a total of 37 hours worked.
Maxiflex.  A type of flexible work schedule that contains core hours on fewer than 10 workdays in the biweekly pay period, but in which an employee may vary the number of hours worked on a given workday or the number of hours each week within the limits established by the OpDiv/StaffDivs.  Below is an example of what a maxiflex schedule might look like.  The basic work requirement is 80 hours and the employee worked 2 credit hours.
Maxiflex Schedule

Image
Maxiflex Schedule, Week 1: This graphic shows week 1 of a maxiflex schedule with core hours (plus lunch period) from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Hours worked: 10 on Monday, 9 on Tuesday, 10 on Wednesday, 8 on Thursday, and 8 on Friday for a total of 45 hours worked.
Maxiflex Schedule

Image
Maxiflex Schedule - Week 2: This graphic shows week 2 of a maxiflex schedule with core hours (plus lunch period) from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Hours worked: 0 on Monday, 7 on Tuesday, 10 on Wednesday, 10 on Thursday, and 10 on Friday for a total of 37 hours worked.
Leave
Leave or Other Excused Absence. AWS has no effect on an employee's right to use annual or sick leave.  All requirements for the advanced approval of non-emergency leave remain in effect.  Responsibilities of employees and supervisors with regard to requesting and approving or disapproving leave, both annual and sick, remain the same. Time off during an employee's basic workweek or AWS must be charged to an appropriate leave category, compensatory time off, credit hours, or other excused absence.  Approved leave taken for the entire day will be charged according to the number of hours that would normally have been worked.  If an AWS employee uses annual or sick leave on a day the employee was otherwise scheduled to work, the employee must be charged leave for the total number of hours required by the work schedule on that day.  Excused absence may be granted to employees on AWS under the same circumstances as with employees on other work schedules.  Refer to HHS Instruction 630-1, “Leave and Excused Absence,” for HHS policy on use of leave and excused absence.
Holidays
5 U.S.C. § 6103  and Executive Order 11582 govern the identification and determination of holidays.  However, when a holiday, designated as such by Federal statute or Executive order,  falls on a regular weekly scheduled non-work day, the day to be treated as a holiday for pay and leave purposes (the “in-lieu-of” holiday) will be determined as follows:
When a holiday occurs on a Saturday, the Friday immediately before is a legal holiday for employees whose basic workweek is Monday through Friday;
When the actual holiday falls on a Sunday, the legal holiday will be the following workday (Monday for most employees). 
For an employee whose basic workweek is other than Monday through Friday, when the actual holiday occurs on a regular weekly non-workday, except the regular weekly non-workday administratively scheduled for the employee instead of Sunday, the legal or in-lieu-of holiday is the workday immediately before the actual holiday.
Part-time CWS and FWS employees are not entitled to an in-lieu-of holiday.  