
Tour of Duty.  The hours of a day (a daily tour of duty) and the days of an administrative workweek (a weekly tour of duty) that constitute an employee’s regularly scheduled administrative workweek.
610-1-50 Responsibilities
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide human resources guidance and policy consistent with HHS and OPM policy, procedures and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
Periodically reviews Operating Division and Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv) procedures to assure conformance with HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and all applicable federal laws and regulations.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads (reference in this document to action by OpDiv/StaffDivs means the OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads):
Comply with this Instruction, and applicable federal laws and regulations.
Designate core hours for their respective OpDiv/StaffDivs.
Establish and publish supplemental policy on the regularly scheduled administrative workweek for full-time employees that includes a 40-hour basic workweek consisting of five (5) consecutive, 8-hour days, including the hours of duty.
When it is impracticable to prescribe a regular schedule of definite hours of duty for each workday of a regularly scheduled administrative workweek, OpDiv/StaffDivs may establish the first 40 hours of duty performed within a period of not more than 6 days of the administrative workweek as the basic workweek. A first 40-hour tour of duty is the basic workweek without the requirement for specific days and hours within the administrative workweek.  All work performed by an employee within the first 40 hours is considered regularly scheduled work for premium pay and hours of duty purposes. Any additional hours of officially ordered or approved work within the administrative workweek are overtime work. See 5 C.F.R. 610.111(b) and HHS Instruction 550-1, “Premium Pay.” 
Ensure that regularly scheduled overtime is used prudently and that it is requested in writing and approved in advance of the administrative workweek, where practicable. 
Track and record hours worked, leave usage, overtime, credit hours, compensatory time and other forms of paid and non-paid duty status.
Authorize variations in work schedules for educational purposes and other circumstances consistent with mission objectives and applicable laws and regulations.
Approve, modify, or terminate alternative work schedules in accordance with laws, regulations, HHS policy and applicable collective bargaining agreements.
Supervisors and Managers:
Approve or modify individual employee work schedules based on their assessment of the needs of the office and each employee's conduct and performance, and in order to accommodate, whenever reasonable and practicable, the employee's preferred arrival and departure times. Supervisors monitor staff attendance and work practices to determine the impact of the staff schedules on the functioning of the office.  As a result of such monitoring or assessments, supervisors may restrict, modify, or cancel an employee's participation in AWS.
Direct changes in work schedules or modifications when necessary to meet operational needs of the organization or when the employee deviates from his or her approved work schedule.
Ensure requests for changes in work schedules are approved in a fair and equitable manner.
Employees
Report to work on time and adhere to the stipulated hours and days of work in accordance with their approved work schedule.
Understand performance standards and abide by rules of conduct which factor into decisions associated with alternative work schedules.
610-1-60 Policy
Weekly and Daily Scheduling of Work. 
Basic Workweek
HHS shall observe an administrative workweek that consists of seven (7) consecutive calendar days which run from 12:01 a.m. Sunday to 12:00 midnight Saturday.
The basic workweek, for full-time employees, shall consist of 40-hours over five (5) consecutive days.
The regularly scheduled administrative workweek shall be from Monday through Friday, eight (8) hours per day with two consecutive days off on Saturday and Sunday. 
The official hours of duty during the basic workweek are from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., which includes a 30-minute meal break that is generally taken between 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., except as otherwise provided within the respective collective bargaining agreement.  The meal break must be taken daily and cannot be forgone in order to shorten the daily tour of duty, unless an exception is approved by an authorized management official.  OpDiv/StaffDivs may vary the official hours of duty, the length of the meal break, and the timeframe during which meal breaks may be taken based on mission requirements and consistent with applicable law, regulations, HHS policies and applicable collective bargaining agreements.
Under 610-1-50(B) above, OpDiv/StaffDivs may prescribe certain exceptions to the basic workweek.