
For federal employees who have duty posts outside the US, and who have a basic workweek other than Monday through Friday, and are regularly scheduled to work on Monday, their legal public (or in-lieu-of) holiday is the first workday of the workweek in which the Monday designated for the observance of the holiday occurs. 5 U.S.C. 6103(b)(3) 
Federal employees in the Washington DC area are entitled to a holiday on the day a President is inaugurated (January 20 following a Presidential election).  Employees are entitled to this holiday if they are employed in: District of Columbia, Montgomery and Prince Georges Counties in Maryland; Arlington and Fairfax Counties in Virginia; and the cities of Alexandria and Falls Church in Virginia.  Pursuant to 5 U.S.C. § 6103(c) , when January 20 “falls on Sunday, the next succeeding day selected for the public observance of the inauguration of the President is a legal public holiday for purpose of” pay and leave.
Full-Time Employees who are authorized to work a flexible work schedule who are relieved or prevented from working on a day designated as a holiday by Federal statute or Executive order are entitled to pay with respect to that day for eight (8) hours. If the President issues an Executive Order granting a half-day holiday, a full-time employee on a flexible work schedule is credited with half the number of hours he/she was scheduled to work, not to exceed four (4) hours. 
Full-Time Employees who are authorized to work a compressed work schedule and who are relieved or prevented from working on a day designated as a holiday by Federal statute or Executive Order are entitled to basic pay for the number of hours of the compressed work schedule on that day.  For example, if an employee is scheduled to work a 9 or 10-hour workday, the employee’s holiday is 9 or 10 hours respectively.  If the President authorizes a half-day holiday, a full-time employee on a compressed work schedule is entitled to basic pay for half the number of hours he/she would otherwise work on that day. 
Part-time employees on a flexible work schedule who are relieved or prevented from working on a day within the employee’s scheduled tour of duty that is designed as a holiday by Federal statute or Executive Order, are entitled to receive basic pay with respect to the holiday for the number of hours they are regularly scheduled to work on that day, not to exceed 8 hours.
Part-time employees on a compressed work schedule who are relieved or prevented from working on a day within their scheduled tour of duty that is designated as a holiday by Federal statute or Executive order are entitled to basic pay for the number of hours of the compressed work schedule on that day.
Part-time CWS and FWS employees are not entitled to an in-lieu-of day off when a holiday falls on a non-work day for the employee.
If an employee has two basic workdays (i.e., two basic scheduled tours of duty) that overlap a single holiday, the employee is entitled to a holiday only for the tour of duty that commences (i.e., begins) on the holiday. The entire workday that begins on the holiday must be treated as if it fell on the holiday.
Meal Breaks
A meal break is an approved period of time in a non-pay and non-work status that interrupts a basic workday or a period of overtime work for the purpose of allowing an employee to eat or engage in personal activities.  Employees who work five (5) or more hours in a day are allocated a 30-minute meal break.  Employees must take a meal break and may not save any part of the thirty (30) minutes in order to leave early or extend subsequent meal periods, unless an exception is authorized by the supervisor or other authorized approving management official.
At the discretion of OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads, and subject to applicable collective bargaining agreements, management may authorize a brief period of paid work-time off of 15 minutes or less to improve organizational and employee proficiency.  However, breaks may not be scheduled immediately before or after a meal break or at the start or end of the workday, and may not be accumulated for use at a later time or in lieu of paid leave.
Employees may request supervisory approval to extend the meal period and make up the difference either at the beginning or ending of the same day.
An employee must be excused from job duties during his/her meal break. However, if an employee is recalled to job duties before the authorized meal break ends, the employee is entitled to be paid for compensable work in accordance with applicable law and regulation.
610-1-70 Documentation and Accountability
Records including all documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the record disposition schedule.  Generally, records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) full years. 
Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, or the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated, or resolved and closed.
ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations.