
610-2-50	EMERGENCY AND MISSION CRITICAL EMERGENCY EMPLOYEES
A.	Employees who are officially designated as “emergency” or “mission critical emergency” are expected to report for duty or remain on duty in the event of a closure, dismissal, or unscheduled leave announcement, unless specifically directed otherwise.  
B.	There are no standard definitions or categories of positions that must be designated as emergency or mission critical emergency.  Each OPDIV is authorized to designate those employees judged to be essential to continue operations in a dismissal, closure or emergency situation.  The designation of emergency employees should be part of an OPDIV’s published emergency response or Continuity Of Operations Plan (COOP).
C.	Employees who are designated as emergency or mission critical emergency should be notified of such designation in writing in advance of any requirement to report for duty in an administrative or emergency situation. 
D.	Emergency or mission critical emergency employees are expected to report for duty on time and remain at work during a closure or dismissal unless directed otherwise.  Emergency or mission critical emergency employees may be excused by OPDIV Head or his/her designee when it is determined that circumstances justify excused absence.  However, mission critical emergency employees may have a further requirement to remain in contact with management during an emergency for instructions to report for work should the need arise.
E.	Employees who are required to work during their regular tour of duty when the workplace is closed or when other employees are allowed to arrive late or leave early are not entitled to receive overtime pay, credit hours, or compensatory time for performing work during their regularly scheduled hours of duty.  If an emergency or mission critical emergency employee, who is required to work, fails to report for duty without adequate reason, he/she may be placed in an absence without leave (AWOL) status.  In such circumstances, AWOL may serve as grounds for progressive disciplinary action.
