610-1: Establishing and Administering Hours of Duty
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 610-1, Establishing and Administering Hours of Duty, dated December 2, 2021.

Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 610-1, Establishing and Administering Hours of Duty, dated 05/16/2008

Background:
This Instruction establishes Departmental policy on hours of duty and clarifies roles and responsibilities for administering hours of duty within the Department.  This Instruction has been revised to address Alternative Work Schedules.    

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out by HHS Operating and Staff Division Heads in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/

Michael V. Culpepper
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources and Chief Human Capital Officer, Acting

610-1-00 Sections
610-1-10 Purpose
610-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
610-1-30 References
610-1-40 Definitions
610-1-50 Responsibilities
610-1-60 Policy
610-1-70 Documentation and Accountability

610-1-10 Purpose
This Instruction implements the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) policy on the establishment of workweeks, work schedules, and related matters in order for HHS to plan and schedule work consistent with the actual work requirements needed to accomplish its mission.    

When provisions of this policy differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

610-1-20 Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage.
The provisions of this Instruction apply to all HHS employees including Federal Wage System employees.

Exclusions.
Members of the Senior Executive Service (SES);
U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) Commissioned Corps Officers
When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements contained in applicable collective bargaining agreement(s), the collective bargaining agreement takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
610-1-30 References
Executive Order 11582 (Observance of Holidays by Government Agencies, February 11, 1971)
5 U.S.C. §§ 6101-6133 (Hours of Work)
5 C.F.R. Part 610 (Hours of Duty)
5 C.F.R. Part 630 (Absence and Leave)
HHS Instruction 630-1 (Leave and Excused Absences), issued December 17, 2010
HHS Guide for Timekeeping, October 2018 
610-1-40 Definitions
Administrative Workweek.  Any period of seven (7) consecutive 24-hour periods as designated in advance by the Secretary or his/her designee(s). See 610-1-60 below.
Alternative Work Schedule (AWS).  Refers to flexible and compressed work schedules.
Basic Work Requirement.  The number of hours, excluding overtime hours, an employee is required to work or to account for by leave or otherwise. 
Compressed Work Schedule (CWS).  For full-time employees, an 80-hour biweekly basic work requirement which is scheduled for less than 10 workdays. For part-time employees, a biweekly basic work requirement of less than 80 hours which is scheduled for less than 10 workdays.
Core Hours.   The designated hours and days during which an employee on a flexible work schedule must be present for work, as designated by the Operating Divisions/Staff Divisions (OpDiv/StaffDivs) Heads.
Credit Hours. For employees on a flexible work schedule, any hours that an employee elects to work in excess of his or her basic work requirement so as to vary the length of a workweek or workday.  Full time employees on a flexible work schedule may accumulate not more than 24 credit hours, and  part-time employees may accumulate not more than one-fourth (1/4) of the hours in their bi-weekly basic work requirement, for carryover from a biweekly pay period to a succeeding biweekly pay period. Credit hours in excess of 24 hours are forfeited and do not entitle the employee to overtime compensation. Credit hours may not be earned or used by employees working under a compressed schedule. 
Flexible Work Schedule (FWS).  A work schedule which includes both 1) core hours; and 2) designated hours during which an employee may elect the time of such employee’s arrival at and departure from work as designated by OpDiv/StaffDivs.
Overtime Hours.  When used with respect to FWS programs, all hours in excess of 8 hours in a day or 40 hours in a week which are officially ordered in advance, but does not include credit hours.  With respect to full-time employees in CWS programs, any hours worked in excess of those specified hours which constitute the compressed work schedule.  With respect to part-time employees in CWS programs, overtime  pay shall begin to be paid after the same number of hours of work after which a full-time employee on a similar schedule would begin to receive overtime pay. Refer to HHS Instruction 550-1, “Premium Pay.”
Regularly Scheduled Administrative Workweek.  For full-time employees, it is the period within an administrative workweek within which an employee is regularly scheduled to work.  For part-time employees, it is the officially prescribed days and hours within an administrative workweek during which an employee is regularly scheduled to work.
Regularly Scheduled Work.  Work that is scheduled in advance of an administrative workweek.
