
610-2-30	COVERAGE AND EXCLUSIONS
A.	The provisions of this Instruction apply to all HHS employees who are subject to the leave provisions under Subchapter 1, Chapter 63 of Title 5, U.S. Code, with the exception of private sector employees and contractors.  HHS employees inside the Washington, D.C.  Capital Beltway are subject to the Washington, D.C., Area Dismissal or Closure Procedures of the U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) and this Instruction.  These procedures are posted on the internet at http://www.opm.gov/oca/compmemo/dismissal.pdf.  Heads of Operating Divisions, or designees outside of the Washington, D.C. area, are authorized to develop local dismissal or closure policies and procedures consistent with this Instruction and OPM requirements.
B.	When the provisions of a negotiated labor/management agreement differ from the provisions of this Instruction, the agreement takes precedence for those employees covered by a negotiated labor/management agreement.

610-2-40	RESPONSIBILITIES
A.	Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (ASAM) or his/her designee is responsible for:
1.	Serving as liaison with OPM on the Washington, D.C., Area Dismissal or Closure Procedures, or any other matter relating to the closure of HHS facilities.
2.	Approving Administrative Orders proposed by Operating Division (OPDIV) Heads that relieve employees from duty without charge to leave in excess of three (3) consecutive work days in a single period of excused absence.
B.	Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (ASAM), Office of Human Resources (OHR)  is responsible for:
1.	Updating and maintaining this policy.
2.	Providing guidance to operating Human Resources organizations (OHROs) regarding the temporary closure of work places and the treatment of absences when temporary closures occur.
C.	OPDIV Heads are responsible for:
1.	Making decisions and issuing administrative orders on the closure of work places outside the Washington, D.C. area for emergency or administrative reasons within the parameters outlined in this Instruction.  This authority may be redelegated to the head of a local facility or entity, as necessary (e.g., Regional Director, District Director, Area Director, etc.)
2.	Complying with OPM’s Dismissal or Closure Procedures for emergency or administrative reasons for work places within the Washington D.C. area and supplementing those procedures as necessary to accomplish mission objectives.  
3.	Developing and implementing a local closure or dismissal procedures that may be necessary to supplement the Washington, D.C., Area Dismissal or Closure Procedures or this Instruction.
4.	Designating an official to serve as liaison with any local Federal Executive Board (FEB).  In locations with several Federal installations, an FEB or similar association of Federal agencies may develop specific procedures to assure equitable treatment of all Federal employees in the area.  In such cases, the chairperson of the association usually issues administrative orders through the media or through a central notification medium such as the one used by OPM for the Washington, D.C. area. 
5.	Consulting with other HHS organizations, as required.  Occasionally, there may be a widespread situation affecting several HHS work places with no central heads of HHS installations located in close proximity to assure consistency.  In those cases, heads of HHS work places (e.g., OPDIV Heads or their designees located in a given commuting area) are expected to consult with local transportation, media, Federal Executive Boards and Federal Executive Associations to develop local plans to ensure that affected employees are treated as consistently as possible.
6.	Designating emergency and mission critical emergency employees as deemed appropriate, based on mission requirements, who are expected to report to work regardless of any administrative closure or dismissal, and ensuring that the employees are notified of their designation as emergency or mission critical emergency employees at least annually, as well as prior to an announced closure or dismissal.  Mission critical emergency employees must be notified of the emergency situations in which they are expected to report for work or remain at work and said policy must be in writing.
7.	Ensuring that the applicable closure or dismissal procedures are disseminated annually and are made available to all OPDIV employees
D.	Operating Human Resources Organizations are responsible for providing advice and guidance to managers within their serviced organizations as necessary on the interpretation of the closure or dismissal procedures and the rules pertaining to leave and excused absence during a closure or dismissal.
E.	HHS Employees are responsible for:
1.	Monitoring appropriate media for administrative closure or dismissal announcements for their area.
2.	Taking reasonable steps (e.g., leaving home early or using public transportation rather than a personal car) to minimize the potential effects of inclement weather or other emergencies on the ability to report for work.
3.	Notifying their immediate supervisors or other appropriate management official(s) of their intentions to take unscheduled leave when an unscheduled leave policy has been announced.  While non-emergency employees are not required to obtain supervisory approval when an unscheduled leave policy is in effect, employees are required to notify supervisors of their intentions to take leave.  


