Material Transmitted:

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 610-2, Temporary Closing of Workplaces and Treatment of Absences, dated May 30, 2008.

Material Superseded:

HHS Instruction 610-2, Temporary Closing of Workplaces and Treatment of Absences, dated February 27, 1997.

Background:
This Instruction has been superseded to bring it into compliance with the current law and regulations pertaining to Hours of Duty and Absence and Leave.  This policy update removes all subject policy pertaining to inside the Washington Capital Beltway since the subject is covered separately under the Washington, DC Dismissal and Closure Procedures; clarifies employees who are covered under this policy; and establishes policy and procedures regarding roles and responsibilities of ASAM, OHR, OPDIV Heads, operating Human Resources organizations, and HHS employees.

In addition, the instruction highlights designation procedures and crucial functions of emergency and mission-critical emergency employees; updates changes in the policies on absences based on temporary closures due to an emergency or administrative situation; and updates changes to leave to address the unique situations arising from AWS and telework schedules.

This issuance is effective immediately.  Implementation under this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.



						Antonia T. Harris
						Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
						


INSTRUCTION 610-2
 
SUBJECT: 	TEMPORARY CLOSING OF WORKPLACES AND TREATMENT OF ABSENCES

610-2-00	Purpose
610-2-10	References 
610-2-20	Definitions
610-2-30	Coverage and Exclusions
610-2-40	Responsibilities
610-2-50	Emergency and Mission Critical Emergency Employees
610-2-60	General Provisions
610-2-70	Excused Absences and Charges to Leave
610-2-80	Reporting and Accountability

Exhibit A	Treatment of Absences and Charges to Leave 
Exhibit B	Additional Provisions for Alternate Work Schedule (AWS) Employees

610-2-00	PURPOSE
This Instruction sets forth the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) policy and procedures on dismissals, temporary closing of work places, and the treatment of absences during these closings in accordance with references (A) through (F).
The policies and procedures apply to situations that prevent significant numbers of HHS employees from reporting for work on time or which require HHS entities to close all or part of their activities, i.e., severe weather conditions, natural disasters; incidents causing disruptions to Department operations (power and/or water outages, disruption of public transportation, etc.); and other emergencies (terrorist attacks, exposure to biohazards, continuity of operations, etc.).

610-2-10	REFERENCES
A.	5 USC § 61, Hours of Work
B.	5 USC § 63, Leave
C.	5 CFR, Part 610, Hours of Duty
D.	5 CFR, Part 630, Absence and Leave
E.	U.S. Office of Personnel Management (USOPM), Washington, D.C., Area Dismissal or Closure Procedures, December 2007
F.	USOPM Handbook on Pay and Leave Benefits for Federal Employees Affected by Severe Weather Conditions or Other Emergency Situations, July 2007


610-2-20	DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this Instruction, the following terms have the meanings indicated: 
A.	Delayed Arrival Permits non-emergency employees to be granted excused absence (administrative leave) for a specified number of hours past their normal arrival time at work. For example, if non-emergency employees are authorized to report for work two (2) hours past their normal arrival time of 7:00 a.m., employees should plan their commute in order to arrive at the work site by 9:00 a.m.  An employee who arrives later than 9:00 a.m. will be charged annual leave for the excess time, unless a specific exception is granted.  Individuals designated as emergency employees are expected to report to work on time.
B.	Early Dismissal Permits non-emergency employees to be granted excused absence for the number of hours remaining in their workday beyond their designated early dismissal time.  Non-emergency employees are dismissed relative to their designated departure times from work. If a 3-hour early dismissal is authorized as a result of inclement weather, non-emergency employees who would normally leave work at 5:00 p.m. would be authorized to leave at 2:00 p.m.  Individuals designated as emergency or mission critical employees are expected to remain at work until their scheduled times of departure, unless directed otherwise.
C.	Alternative Work Schedules (AWS) Pertain to employees who work a fixed compressed work schedule or a flexible work schedule. For purposes of this Instruction, this definition also includes flexitime and all other variations.  For employees on gliding schedules, delayed arrival would typically be based on the employee's most typical or frequent arrival time at work.  Early dismissal would be based on the time the employee had planned to leave work on the day in which the early dismissal is authorized if the employee had been able to work a full day.
D.	Administrative Order An order issued by an authorized official during brief (not to exceed 3 consecutive days) emergency situations that excuses non-emergency employees from work without charge to leave or loss of pay.   Employees designated as emergency or mission critical are generally not relieved from duty during an emergency.  An Administrative Order is not appropriate in situations of extensive duration or periods of suspended operations where leave could be scheduled, employees furloughed or assigned other work. 
E.	Administrative Situations  May involve severe weather conditions, natural disaster, power outages, major equipment failures impacting major operations or services (e.g., electricity, heat, air conditioning) or  unforeseen circumstances (e.g., fire, broken water main, bomb threat) that require relieving employees temporarily from duty at one or more HHS facilities.
F.	Disabled Employees Under the Rehabilitation Act, a disabled person is defined as someone who has a physical or mental impairment which prevents them from performing major life activities without assistance, including care taking functions such as bathing, clothing, or other manual tasks.  The disability may be permanent or temporary.  The Rehabilitation Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability in programs conducted by Federal agencies, in programs receiving Federal financial assistance, in Federal employment, and in the employment practices of Federal contractors.
G.	Emergency Employees A general category of individuals who have been designated by management as critical to agency operations during a dismissal, closure, or other emergency situation (i.e. response/continuity of operations plans). Emergency employees may be members of other groups (e.g. Continuity of Operations Emergency Relocation Group) or have other designations (e.g. Mission Critical Emergency Employees). 
H.	Emergency Situations  May result in commuting delays, prevent employees in significant numbers from reporting to work, or necessitate the closing of several Federal activities in the same geographical area (e.g., heavy snow, severe icing conditions, floods, earthquakes, hurricanes, air pollution, power failures, interruption of public transportation, acts of terror, etc.).
I.	Fixed Work Schedule A work schedule that is fixed with a designated time of arrival and departure.
J.	Gliding Schedule A type of flexible work schedule in which a full-time employee has a basic work requirement of 8 hours in each day and 40 hours in each week, may select a starting and stopping time each day, and may change starting and stopping times daily within the established flexible hours. 
K.	Mission Critical Emergency Employees Emergency employees (e.g., continuity of operations or emergency relocation group personnel) who have been designated by management as critical to agency operations, who are expected to remain at the worksite during a dismissal or closure unless directed otherwise.  Mission critical emergency employees may be required to remain in contact and accessible to management during an emergency or closure.  
L.	Temporary Closing  The closing, in whole or in part, of a work place and the excusing of employees' absence for short periods of time because of an emergency or administrative situation.
M.	Telework Employee An employee who is officially authorized to work at an alternate work site, either at home or at an authorized “telecommuting” facility.
N.	Unscheduled Leave Policy  A policy announced by OPM or other appropriate management official which allows non-emergency employees, who are unable to report for work, to request unscheduled leave for their entire scheduled workday.  Employees must notify their supervisors of their intent to take unscheduled leave. 

