Exhibit A - TREATMENT OF ABSENCES AND CHARGES TO LEAVE

When the work place is closed temporarily because of an emergency or an administrative situation, the table below shows how to charge leave or excuse absences.

I.  If an early dismissal policy is announced during work hours... 

AND the employee is...	THEN the absence is charged to...

at work at the time of dismissal.	excused absence, even if the employee was scheduled to take leave later in the day.
on approved leave but is expected to return to work after the announcement of an early dismissal policy but before his or her authorized departure time.	The approved leave up to the time of dismissal and excused absence following the employee's authorized departure time, even if the employee is scheduled to take leave later in the day.

Example: Employee usually works 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., takes 4 hours of annual leave from 8:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. A storm closes the work place at 11:30 a.m.

The employee is charged 3 (not 4) hours of annual leave from 8:30 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. and excused absence from 11:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
is scheduled to report to work before the dismissal but fails to do so.	annual leave, sick leave, LWOP, or AWOL, as appropriate, for the entire work day.
at work when the closing time is announced and goes on approved leave before the time is set for dismissal.


	
	leave or LWOP only from the time the employee left until the announced dismissal time and excused absence for the rest of the day.

Example A: Employee usually works from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. and is told at 9:30 a.m. that the work place will close at 11:30 a.m.  Employee requests and goes on approved annual leave from 10:30 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. and is on excused absence for the rest of the day. 
at work and leaves before official word of the pending dismissal is received.	leave, LWOP, or AWOL for the rest of the day. 

Example:  Employee works from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., and decides to leave work at 9:30 a.m. on approved leave, LWOP, or unapproved leave.  The dismissal order is received by the agency after the employee has left.  The employee is charged annual leave, LWOP or AWOL status for the rest of the day from 9:30 a.m. 
on approved leave when official dismissal is announced and is expected to be on leave for the rest of the day anyway (this includes employees on AWS day off).	the leave or AWS credit hours the employee is already on. Example:  Employee is on annual leave all of the pay period.  A storm closes the work place early on Tuesday.  The employee is charged annual leave.

II.	If the emergency situation arises during non-work hours and forces the work place to close for the entire day...

AND the employee is...	THEN the absence is charged to...
scheduled to work on that day.
(This includes employees who arrive at work to discover the work place is closed.)	excused absence. Example:  Employee is scheduled to work on Friday.  Due to a storm on Thursday night, the work place is closed all day Friday.  The absence is excused.
on previously authorized paid leave (such as sick leave, annual leave, or credit hours, etc.)	excused absence. Example:  Employee is on sick leave when the work place closes for the entire day.  The employee's absence is charged to excused absence (not sick leave).
on AWS day off.	No absence is charged, since the employee was not scheduled to report to work.
on either LWOP or AWOL both the day before and the day after the day the work place closes.		LWOP or AWOL, depending on whether the employee is on LWOP or AWOL.

III.	If the emergency situation arises prior to or early in the work day and delayed arrival is authorized...

AND the employee is...	THEN the absence is charged to...

already at work.	Not charged, if the dismissal occurs before the employee is scheduled to begin work or excused absence is authorized for the period of time covered by the delayed arrival.
en route or still at home.	excused absence authorized by the administrative order or approved by leave approving official.
on approved leave.	leave the employee is already on.

 
Exhibit B -	ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS FOR ALTERNATE WORK SCHEDULE (AWS)  		EMPLOYEES

Employees on AWS are subject to the absence and leave provisions covered in the preceding Exhibit A of this Instruction.  They are also subject to the following provisions:

A.	Early Dismissal

1.	When an early work dismissal policy is authorized for a specific time, AWS employees are dismissed at the end of their tour of duty or at the specific time, whichever is earlier.

2.	When an early work dismissal policy is authorized for a specific number of hours, AWS employees are excused for the number of hours authorized by the announcement or Administrative Order before the end of the workday as ordered. 

B.	Delayed Arrival

1.	Tardiness of employees on compressed work schedules is excused based on the number of hours of administrative leave authorized by the applicable announcement, Administrative Order or OPDIV head.

2.	Tardiness of AWS employees who are required to revert to a fixed schedule during emergencies is treated consistent with that of employees in the same organization who are on a fixed work schedule.

3.	Employees on flexible work schedules who start work before the excused tardiness is authorized to work their regular tour-of-duty, do not receive extra compensation or credit hours for being on duty earlier than other employees whose tardiness is excused.

C:	Tour of Duty Defines Official Hours of Operation

1.	 Employees on flexible work schedules who start work before the Official hours of Operation (i.e. 8:00 am to 4:30 pm), are not required to remain at the duty site longer than their regular tour of duty (8, 9, 10 hours/day) simply to meet the end of the non-flexible work schedule traditional Official Hours of Operations.

2.	Employees on flexible work schedules, who are required to remain on duty after meeting their regular tour of duty hours are eligible for Credit Hours or other appropriate premium pay.



D.	Closure

1.	AWS employees whose tour-of-duty commences before the closure of the work place is announced and who reported to work and complete their tour of duty prior to the time of the closure announcement return home and do not receive compensation or credit hours for having come to work.

2.	Employees on a compressed work schedule who are in a scheduled non-work day status on  a day the work place is closed are not entitled to another day off, any compensation, or credit hours for the closure day. 
