
630-1-111 	TRANSFER AND RECREDIT OF LEAVE BETWEEN THE CIVIL SERVICE 			AND OTHER LEAVE SYSTEMS

A.	Statutory Requirements

5 U.S.C. 6308 requires that annual and sick leave be transferred or re-credited on an adjusted basis (i.e., seven calendar days of leave are equivalent to five workdays of leave) when an employee moves without a break in service between positions under different leave systems. 

B.	Transfer of Leave from Other Leave Systems

When an employee from another Federal agency with a different leave system transfers to a civil service position in this Department, the employee’s leave should be transferred in accordance with 5 CFR, Part 630, Subpart E, and 48 CG 212.  For example, a nurse in the Veterans Administration earns eight hours of annual leave per pay period and may accumulate a maximum of 685 hours.  If a nurse with an accumulation of 685 hours transfers to a civil service position in this Department, the 685 hours will constitute the employee’s annual leave ceiling (rather than the normal 240 hours). When the nurse uses more leave than he/she accrues during a year, the leave balance at the end of the leave year becomes the employee’s new maximum carryover (until it reaches the normal 240-hour carryover).

630-1-120	CREDITABLE SERVICE BASED ON NON-FEDERAL EXPERIENCE FOR 			ANNUAL LEAVE ACCRUAL

A.	Policy 

It is the policy of HHS to allow the flexibility of offering potential job candidates a service credit towards their annual leave accrual rate.  This hiring flexibility is to be used as a recruitment incentive for employees who will be newly appointed or employees being reappointed after a break in service of 90 days or more.  The credited experience must have been obtained in a non-Federal or active duty military position having duties that directly relate to the duties of the position to be filled.  The OPDIV/STAFFDIV Head and human resources officials must concur that this experience is necessary to achieve an important Department mission or performance goal.

B.	Responsibility

1.	Office of Human Resources (OHR), Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration (ASA), Office of the Secretary (OS) - OHR is responsible for developing and issuing this policy.  The deputy assistant secretary for human tesources has authority to interpret and issue human resources policy within HHS. 

2.	Operating Division (OPDIV)/Staff Division (STAFFDIV) Heads – The OPDIV or STAFFDIV heads or their designees must approve that the selectee’s experience is necessary to achieve an important Department mission or performance goal.

3.	Human Resources (HR) directors – The Human Resources (HR) directors have authority to implement OPM’s regulations under 5 CFR 630.205.  For the purpose of this document, an HR director includes the human resources center directors, the HR director for the National Institutes of Health and the HR director for the Indian Health Service.  Using 5 CFR 630.205, the HR directors must:

a.	In conjunction with the selecting official, determine that the selectee hired:

(i)	Has the skills and experience necessary and essential to the position.

(ii)	Acquired the skills and experience through the performance of duties in a non-Federal position or an active duty uniform position that directly relate to the duties of the position for which the individual has been selected.

b.	Determine the amount of service to be credited for leave purposes.  This amount may not exceed the actual period of service during which the individual performed duties directly related to the position to which he or she is being appointed.

c.	Approve all documentation prior to the effective date of the employee’s entrance on duty and grant service credit prior to the employee’s entry on duty.’

C.	Documentation

1.	The selectee must provide written documentation, acceptable to the agency, of his or her qualifying service.  All documentation must be approved by the HR center director prior to the effective date of the employee’s entry on duty.  Credit is to be granted effective on the date that the employee enters on duty in the relevant position.  

2.	The HR center director shall justify and document his or her reasons for granting credit.  (See Attachment A). Such documentation shall include:  

a.	A copy of the position description for the position being filled and the vacancy announcement for the position (if applicable);

b.	The selectee’s resume, which in the case of non-Federal personnel, must clearly document the length and nature of the service to be credited or be supplemented by supporting documentation to this effect;

c.	For each period of service for which credit is granted, an explanation of how the duties relate to the position to which the selectee will be appointed; and

d.	In the case of active duty uniformed service credited, a form DD214, Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty, documenting the service. 

e.	For each grant of credit, a copy of the justification and documentation, position description, vacancy announcement, and resume (both non-federal and uniformed service) shall be submitted to their human resource director with sufficient time to allow approval prior to the effective date of the employee’s entry on duty.

D.	Suspension of Creditable Service

An employee must complete one full year of continuous service with the OPDIV/STAFFDIV in order to retain this service credit beyond his or her initial appointment.  If the employee leaves the position prior to his or her first full year of employment, the Department must recalculate his or her service computation date for leave purposes; however, the employee will retain all accrued or accumulated annual leave for purposes of transfer or lump-sum leave payment.

E.	Reporting

1.	The HR center directors shall submit an annual report to the deputy assistant secretary for human resources on the use of this policy.  The report should contain information on the total number of selectees who were granted service credit during the previous fiscal year; the amount of annual leave the selectee was granted; and the number of positions designated necessary to achieve an important Department mission and goal.  This report is due on or before October 30.

2.	In addition, the Department’s human resources director may rescind this authority if it is determined that this flexibility is used inappropriately.

