
630-1-60 	VOLUNTARY TRANSFER OF LEAVE

A.	Purpose

Under the Voluntary Leave Transfer Program (VLTP), unused accrued annual leave may be transferred for use by another employee who has been determined to have a medical or family medical emergency and has been approved as a leave recipient.

B.	Definitions

Medical emergency means a medical condition of an employee or a family member that is likely to require an employee’s absence from duty for a prolonged period of time (24 hours for full-time employees) and is likely to result in a substantial loss of income to the employee because of the unavailability of paid leave. (Absence from duty necessitated by pregnancy and childbirth is an acceptable reason for requesting use of the VLTP.)

C.	Applying to Become a Leave Recipient

1.	Current employees affected by a medical or family medical emergency must apply in writing to become a leave recipient.  In the event that an employee is not capable of making application on his or her own behalf, another employee in this Department, an employee’s representative, or a family member may make the application.

2.	Each application for VLTP is to be initially submitted to the immediate supervisor of  the potential leave recipient for consideration and must include:

a.	The name, position title, and grade or pay level of the prospective leave recipient

b.	A brief description of the nature, severity, and anticipated duration of the medical or family medical emergency affecting the applicant

c.	A statement from a physician or other appropriate expert (e.g., Christian Science Practitioner, chiropractor, psychologist, etc.) and any additional information, as appropriate,  that shows the nature, severity, and duration of the medical or family medical emergency.

D.	Retroactivity

Transferred annual leave may be substituted retroactively for a period of leave without pay (LWOP) or to liquidate advanced annual or sick leave granted to the approved leave recipient to cover absences during a medical or family medical emergency.
	
E.	Processing Applications

The actual approval or disapproval of an application must be based on the determination by designated officials as to whether the potential leave recipient’s absence from duty is (or is expected to be) at least 24 hours.  (In the case of a part-time employee or an employee with an uncommon tour of duty, the determination should be made on the basis of 30% of the average number of hours of work in the employee’s biweekly scheduled tour of duty.) Such absence can be consecutive or intermittent hours during the leave year. 
	
F.	Leave Donations from Other Federal Agencies

This Department will accept the transfer of annual leave from donors employed in other Federal agencies, and employees of this Department may donate annual leave to employees in other Federal agencies when other agencies accept outside donations.

G.	Using Transferred Leave

1.	A recipient’s annual and sick leave accrued and accumulated prior to the approval date of the recipient’s application must be used before any transferred annual leave.  Sick leave must first be used in situations involving care for a family member. 

2.	Transferred annual leave may accumulate without regard to the limitations imposed by 5 U.S.C. 6304(a). 

3.	Transferred leave may not be:

a.	Transferred to another leave recipient; or

b.	Included in a lump-sum payment; or

c.	Made available for re-credit upon reemployment by a Federal agency; or

d.	Used after the recipient’s medical or family medical emergency is terminated.

H.	Accrual of Annual and Sick Leave

Once the employee is using the transferred leave, he/she continues to accrue annual and sick leave up to a maximum of 40 hours in each category (or, in the case of a part-time employee or an employee with an uncommon tour of duty, the average number of hours of work in the employee’s weekly scheduled tour of duty) regardless of whether it is a family medical or personal medical emergency.  Once 40 hours of each type of leave are accumulated in this separate account and the medical emergency still exists, this separate leave accumulation stops.

1.	This annual and sick leave accrued by the employee while in transferred leave status must be kept in a separate leave account from any leave account under 5 U.S.C. 6304 and 5 U.S.C. 6307 and must not be available for the employee’s use until the first applicable pay period beginning after the date on which the employee’s medical emergency ends, except that it may be used if the employee exhausts all donated leave.

2.	Any leave recipient who returns to work on a part-time schedule while still in a medical emergency situation (e.g., therapy, gradual return to work under doctor’s orders, family member’s therapy) will earn regular annual and sick leave (5 U.S. Code 6304 and 6307).  If in a given pay period an employee uses some donated leave but also works and uses regular leave, all leave earned during that pay period is credited to the employee’s regular leave account, not the separate account described above. If otherwise permitted, this accrued regular leave must be used before any donated leave.

3.	If an employee who is in a leave transfer status terminates his/her Federal service, these separate 40-hour annual and sick leave accruals may not be credited to the employee for lump-sum leave purposes.


I.	Donating Leave

1.	Without a waiver, a leave donor may not donate more than one-half of the amount of annual leave he/she would be entitled to accrue during the leave year in which the donation is made.  This one-half limit applies whether the leave is donated all at one time or in increments at various times during the leave year. Waivers can be approved by leave-approving officials.

2.	Without a waiver, a leave donor who is projected to have annual leave that otherwise would be subject to forfeiture at the end of the leave year may not donate more than the lesser of:

a.	Half the amount of annual leave he/she would be entitled to accrue during the leave year in which the donation is made, or

b.	The number of work hours remaining in the leave year (as of the date of the transfer) for which he/she is scheduled to work and receive pay.

3.	As indicated in the law and regulations, an employee cannot donate leave to his/her immediate supervisor.

J.	Restoring Transferred Annual Leave

Unused leave donated to the recipient must be restored to the donor’s account upon termination of a medical or family medical emergency .

630-1-70	VOLUNTARY LEAVE BANK PROGRAM

OPDIVs may elect to establish and administer a Voluntary Leave Bank Program, consistent with the applicable law and Office of Personnel Management regulations.  A Voluntary Leave Bank Program enables employees to contribute accrued or accumulated annual leave to a “leave bank”.  The leave from this bank may be made available to a leave bank member who requires leave because of a medical emergency.

