
630-1-130 	DEFINITIONS

The following terms are defined for purposes of use of sick leave, funeral leave, voluntary leave transfer, voluntary leave bank, and emergency leave transfer.

A.	Committed relationship means one in which the employee, and the domestic partner of the employee, are each other’s sole domestic partner (and are not married to or domestic partners with anyone else); and share responsibility for a significant measure of each other’s common welfare and financial obligations.  This includes, but is not limited to, any relationship between two individuals of the same or opposite sex that is granted legal recognition by a State or by the District of Columbia as a marriage or analogous relationship (including, but not limited to, a civil union).

B.	Covered active duty

1.	In the case of a member of a regular component of the Armed Forces, duty during the deployment of the member with the Armed Forces to a foreign country; and 
2.	In the case of a member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces, duty during the deployment of the member with the Armed Forces to a foreign country under a call or order to active duty under a provision of law referred to in section 101 (a)(13)(B) of title 10, United States Code. 

C.	Covered Service / Military Member

1.	A member of the Armed Forces, including a member of the National Guard or Reserves, who is undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy, is otherwise in an outpatient status, or is otherwise on the temporary disability retired list, for a serious injury or illness; or
2.	A veteran who is undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy, for a serious injury or illness and who was a member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the National Guard or Reserves) at any time during the period of 5 years preceding the date on which the veteran undergoes that medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy.
3.	Includes the employee’s spouse, son, daughter, or parent for the purpose of exigency leave.
4.	Includes the employee’s spouse, son, daughter, parent, or next of kin for the purpose of leave to care for a covered service member.

D.	Domestic partner means an adult in a committed relationship with another adult, including both same-sex and opposite-sex relationships.

E.	Exigency leave – A qualifying exigency is a non-medical activity that is directly related to the covered military member’s active duty or call to active duty status. Examples of appropriate use of qualifying exigency leave: short notice deployment, military events and related activities, urgent childcare and school activities, financial and legal arrangements, counseling, rest and recuperation, post-deployment activities, and additional activities which arise out of the military member’s covered active duty or call to covered active duty status. Refer to Title 29, Section 825.126 - Leave because of a qualifying exigency for more information. 

F.	Family member means an individual with any of the following relationships to the employee:

1.	Spouse, and parents thereof;

2.	Sons and daughters, and spouses thereof;

3.	Parents, and spouses thereof;

4.	Brothers and sisters, and spouses thereof;

5.	Grandparents and grandchildren, and spouses thereof;

6.	Domestic partner and parents, sons, daughters, brothers, sisters, grandparents and grandchildren thereof, including domestic partners of any individual in paragraphs (b) through (e) of this definition; and

7.	Any individual related by blood or affinity whose close association with the employee is the equivalent of a family relationship.

G.	Immediate relative – Same as definition for Family Member. 

H.	Next of kin, used with respect to an individual, means the nearest blood relative of that individual. Refer to CFR 825.122(d).

I.	Parent 

1.	A biological, adoptive, step, or foster parent of the employee, or a person who was a foster parent of the employee when the employee was a minor;

2.	A person who is the legal guardian of the employee or was the legal guardian of the employee when the employee was a minor or required a legal guardian;

3.	A person who stands in loco parentis to the employee or stood in loco parentis to the employee when the employee was a minor or required someone to stand in loco parentis; or

4.	A parent, as described in paragraphs (a) through (c) of this definition, of an employee’s spouse or domestic partner.

J.	Serious injury or illness 

1.	In the case of a member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the National Guard or Reserves) means an injury or illness that was incurred by the member in line of duty on active duty in the Armed Forces (or existed before the beginning of the member’s active duty and was aggravated by service in line of duty on active duty in the Armed Forces) and that may render the member medically unfit to perform the duties of the member’s office, grade, rank, or rating; and

2.	In the case of a veteran who was a member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the National Guard or Reserves) at any time during a period described in paragraph (8)(B), means an injury or illness that was incurred by the member in line of duty on active duty in the Armed Forces (or existed before the beginning of the member’s active duty and was aggravated by service in line of duty on active duty in the Armed Forces) and that manifested itself before or after the member became a veteran.

K.	Son or daughter 

1.	biological, adopted, step or foster son or daughter of the employee;

2.	A person who is a legal ward or was a legal ward of the employee when that individual was a minor or required a legal guardian;

3.	A person for whom the employee stands in loco parentis or stood in loco parentis when that individual was a minor or required someone to stand in loco parentis; or

4.	A son or daughter, as described in paragraphs (a) through (c) of this definition, of an employee’s spouse or domestic partner.

L.	Spouse - an individual who is a husband or wife pursuant to a marriage that is a legal union between one man and one woman, including common law marriage between one man and one woman in States where it is recognized.

M.	Veteran - a person who served in the active military, naval, or air service, and who was discharged or released there from under conditions other than dishonorable.
 
