
630-1-90	COURT LEAVE

A.	Definition

Court leave is authorized absence of an employee from official duty for attendance at court and other judicial proceedings, either as a juror or a witness in certain circumstances, without charge to other leave or loss of pay.


B.	Granting of Court Leave

1.	Court leave is granted to permanent and temporary employees, both full-time and part-time, for serving in a nonofficial capacity for:

a.	Jury duty with a Federal, District of Columbia, State, or local court.

b.	Witness duty on behalf of a State or local government.

c.	Witness duty on behalf of a private party when the Federal or District of Columbia government, or a State or local government, is a party to the judicial proceeding.

2.	Intermittent employees may not be granted court leave.

3.	A night shift employee who is eligible for court leave and who is in court during the day is granted court leave for the night shift. The employee is entitled to the night shift differential.

4.	When an employee is required to serve on a jury or as a witness while on annual leave, the leave-approving official must substitute court leave if the employee is eligible.  An employee who is on leave without pay when required to serve is not granted court leave.

5.	Court leave is granted only for the days of an employee’s scheduled tour of duty on which the employee performs court service or for portions of such days.

C.	Jury Duty

1.	It is Department policy to request exemption of an employee from jury duty only in those rare cases where the employee’s absence would seriously handicap the work of the Department.  In such cases, the supervisor should prepare a written statement which clearly relates how the work of the Department would be adversely affected and request an exemption from the appropriate court authority. Employees may request exemptions for compelling personal reasons on their own initiative.

2.	When excused from jury duty for a day or a part of a day, an employee must return to work if dismissed early enough to return more than two hours before the tour of duty is over.  The official authorized to grant court leave may continue the employee on court leave for the rest of the day in such cases only if the official determines that return to work would constitute a hardship for the employee.

D.	Witness Duty

1.	Attendance at a judicial proceeding as a witness in an official capacity is considered official duty and no leave of any kind is charged.  Attendance at a judicial proceeding by an employee who is summoned by the court or authority or assigned by the Department to testify in a nonofficial capacity on behalf of the United States Government or that of the District of Columbia, is also considered official duty.  Travel expenses for court attendance may be authorized in situations where the employee is considered to be performing official duty.

2.	Court leave may be granted to an employee who is testifying in a nonofficial capacity on behalf of a State or local government.

3.	Court leave may be granted to an employee who is testifying in a nonofficial capacity on behalf of a private party when the United States or District of Columbia Government or a State or local government is a party to the proceeding. (However, court leave is not to be granted to an employee who appears as a witness on his/her own behalf if such a suit is filed by that employee or if the employee is the defendant in the suit.  For absences for this purpose, the employee may request annual leave or leave without pay.)

4.	An employee may request annual leave or leave without pay when the employee is testifying in a nonofficial capacity in a court suit between private individuals or companies (i.e., the United States or District of Columbia Government or a State or local government is not a party to the suit).

E.	Procedures

1.	An employee who is called for court service as either a witness or juror must present the court order, subpoena, or summons to the leave-approving official. Upon return to duty, the employee must submit to the leave-approving official written evidence, such as a marshal’s statement of court attendance.

2.	Fees received by an employee for jury or witness service for which court leave is granted or official duty is considered proper cannot be retained by the employee.  The employee should accept and submit such fees to the appropriate HHS finance office.

a.	Fees may be retained if they are for service outside the regular tour of duty or on a non-workday or holiday.  Fees may also be retained if they are for service as a nonofficial witness in a court suit between private individuals or companies, since the employee is not on court leave or official duty in such a situation.

b.	Not all monies received for jury or witness service are classified as fees.  Some government entities provide “expense money” which is considered reimbursement for expenses incurred while serving as a juror or witness. Expense money received may be retained by the employee and need not be refunded to the Federal Government.
