
630-1-40 	ANNUAL LEAVE

A.	Qualifying Period

1.	An employee whose appointment is for 90 calendar days or longer earns and may be granted annual leave beginning with the first day of the first full pay period following appointment. 

2.	If an appointment is for less than 90 days, the employee is not entitled to annual leave but may request leave without pay.

a.	If an appointment of less than 90 days is extended or converted to another appointment of less than 90 days without a break in service of one work day, the employee will still not earn annual leave until the actual employment counted from the initial appointment equals 90 days.  As soon as the employee has 90 days of employment, he/she earns annual leave retroactive to the initial appointment date.

b.	If after an initial appointment of less than 90 days, the extension or conversion to appointment was for 90 days or more, the employee earns annual leave retroactive to the date of the initial appointment. 

c.	If an employee took leave without pay while under an appointment of less than 90 days and then earns annual leave retroactive to the initial date of the appointment as described in number 1 above, he/she may not substitute annual leave for the leave without pay. 

d.	If an employee is currently on an appointment of less than 90 days and has annual leave re-credited from a lump-sum payment from previous Federal service, the employee may use the re-credited annual leave during the current appointment at his/her request.

B.	Maximum Accumulation

1.	Employees can carry over to the next leave year a maximum of 30 days (240 hours) of accrued annual leave. (720 hours for members of the Senior Executive Service and 360 hours for Federal employees stationed overseas).  

2.	Leave earned in excess of these maximums is forfeited if not used by the end of the leave year. (Under special conditions, forfeited annual leave may be restored as described in 630-1-40(F).

C.	Granting Annual Leave

1.	The employee initiates a request for use of annual leave and the request is acted upon by the leave-approving official.  Leave-approving officials may, consistent with operational demands, prescribe when annual leave may be taken, refuse to grant annual leave, or revoke annual leave that has been granted and recall an employee to duty based on the needs of the mission.

2.	For circumstances in which annual leave may be substituted for sick leave, see 630-1-50(A)(3).

3.	For circumstances in which sick leave may be substituted for annual leave, see 630-1-50(A)(2)(f).

4.	Annual leave may not be granted to an employee when it is known in advance that the employee is separating from Federal service, except where the date of separation has already been established under regulatory or statutory requirements (e.g. reduction in force or transfer of function); or in order for the employee to qualify for an immediate retirement; or for an employee to qualify to carry health benefits coverage into retirement.

D.	Advance Annual Leave

1.	Employees are not entitled to advance annual leave. However, under very unusual circumstances, an employee may be granted advance annual leave up to the amount to be earned by the end of the appointment or the end of the current leave year, whichever is sooner. 

2.	Annual leave must not be advanced when it is likely the employee will retire, be separated, or resign before the advanced leave will be earned.

E.	Leave Indebtedness

1.	An employee’s annual leave account may be overdrawn at the end of the leave year through error or because the employee was advanced annual leave and then did not earn the expected amount due to being on leave without pay or absent without leave.  When an employee’s account is overdrawn, the debt will be carried over and charged against annual leave earned in the following year, unless the employee elects to make a refund payment.

2.	An employee who is separated while indebted for advance annual leave must refund the amount due or have the amount owed deducted from any monies due to the employee.  For exceptions, see 630-1-30(F).

F.	Restoration of Annual Leave

1.	Conditions

a.	As a general rule, annual leave in excess of an employee’s maximum carryover balance is forfeited if not used by the end of the leave year.  This excess annual leave, sometimes called “use or lose” leave, may be considered for restoration only under one of the following conditions:

(i)	To correct an administrative error when the error causes the loss of annual leave.

(ii)	When annual leave is scheduled in writing in advance but its use is denied because of an exigency of the public business.

(iii)	When use of scheduled annual leave is prevented by illness or injury, provided the annual leave was scheduled in writing in advance and its use could not be rescheduled between the termination of the illness and the end of the leave year.

b.	OPM regulations require that “use or lose” annual leave must be scheduled at least three pay periods prior to the end of the leave year, except as noted above. The Department does not have authority to waive this requirement.

c.	The leave-approving official must approve the employee’s request “in writing in advance” for “use or lose” annual leave for use at the time requested by the employee or, if that is not possible, must reschedule the leave for use at some other mutually agreeable time before the end of the leave year.

d.	If an exigency arises which necessitates cancellation of the employee’s “use or lose” annual leave, the situation must be presented to the official with authority to make an exigency determination. That official must determine:

(i)	Whether or not an exigency exists which is of such importance that an employee cannot be released from duty; and

(ii)	Whether or not there is any reasonable alternative to the cancellation of an employee’s “use or lose “annual leave, or to the assignment of that employee to the work generated by the exigency.

e.	The determination must be documented and the specific beginning and ending dates of the exigency must be fixed. The determination of the exigency must be made before the cancellation of the employee’s scheduled leave and not after the fact.

f.	If the requirements in b and c (2) above are not met (i.e., the employee’s request was submitted but not approved, or the exigency determination was not made before the employee’s leave was canceled), this may be considered an administrative error and the forfeited annual leave may be considered for restoration. (See 57 Comptroller General 325 and 58 Comptroller General 684.) However, if the employee did not request the leave in writing in advance, this is not considered an administrative error and the forfeited annual leave cannot be restored.  (The only exception is for a prolonged illness preceding the end of a leave year where the employee may be presumed to have requested proper scheduling of the annual leave.) (See Comptroller General Decision B-193431, dated August 8, 1979.)

g.	If an exigency or illness that caused cancellation of an employee’s “use or lose” annual leave terminates before the end of the leave year, efforts must be made to reschedule the annual leave before the end of the leave year to avoid forfeiture.
