
630-1-80	EXCUSED ABSENCE

A.	Definition

Excused absence is absence from duty administratively authorized without loss of pay and without charge to leave. The term “administrative leave” is sometimes used to refer to excused absence.  Both the Merit Systems Protection Board and the Comptroller General have determined that it is inappropriate to grant long periods of excused absence for no other reason than to settle a case or to permit an employee to accumulate enough time to become eligible to retire.

B.	Excused Absence Situations

Situations where excused absence may be authorized include, but are not limited to the following:

1.	Attendance at administrative hearings.

2.	Bone marrow and organ/tissue donation and transplantation. An employee may use: 
a.	Up to exceed 7 days of leave to serve as a bone-marrow donor
b.	Up to 30 days of leave to serve as an organ donor. 

3.	Blood donations.

4.	Holidays for part-time employees.  Part-time employees are not entitled to (a) holidays designated by law or executive order or (b) days observed as holidays when the actual holiday falls on one of their non-work days (see 26 Comptroller General 690, and 32 Comptroller General 378). They are not entitled to an in lieu of holiday.  For example, if Christmas falls on Saturday, the in lieu of holiday is Friday for most employees. A part-time employee is not entitled to the Friday as a holiday, even if he/she were scheduled to work on that day.  However, in such a situation, the employee may be granted excused absence where, for example, the office is closed. (See Comptroller General Decision B-210741, April 24, 1984.)

5.	Medical Examinations and Treatments

a.	Examples are examination in connection with an application for disability retirement initiated by the Department and examination or preventive treatment authorized under the federal employees’ health program.

b.	For an employee who suffers a disabling traumatic injury on the job, the employee’s absence on the day of injury will be excused.  Continuation of pay (C.O.P.) may be authorized for subsequent absences, examinations, or treatments related to a traumatic injury.  When an employee has exhausted (or is not eligible for) the 45 days of C.O.P. and has returned to work, then LWOP, annual leave, or sick leave may be granted for injury-related examinations or treatment; the employee may then apply to the Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs for compensation or leave buy back for the period in question.

6.	Registration for military service.

7.	Participation in civil defense activities.

8.	Voting and registration.

9.	Inclement weather or closure of work place.

10.	Job interviews and other out-placement activities when it is determined that this  is in the Department’s interest. (Downsizing is the most common but not the only example where excused absence would be appropriate.)

11.	Participation in health and fitness activities.  An official with delegated authority may approve excused absence for an employee to participate in health and fitness activities if the activity is officially sponsored and administered and for a specific, fixed duration. Examples are Federal fitness day events, Department sponsored health screenings, agency fitness center orientation, or a smoking cessation program.

12.	Participation in preventive health screenings. Examples of preventive health screenings include, but are not limited to, screening for prostate, cervical, colorectal, and breast cancers, sickle cell anemia, blood lead level, blood cholesterol level, immunity system disorders such as HIV, and blood sugar level testing for diabetes.

a.	Up to four (4) hours of excused absence each leave year may be approved for employees with less than 80 hours of sick leave. Employees may request annual leave, sick leave, or leave without pay when more than four hours of administrative leave is needed. 

b.	An employee may not be granted excused absence to accompany a family member receiving preventative health screenings. 

c.	The four hours of excused absence may be used all at once or a portion at a time over more than one day during the leave year. 

d.	Employees are encouraged to make maximum use of existing work schedule and leave flexibilities (e.g., alternative work schedules, granting leave under the Federal Government's sick and annual leave programs, and granting excused absence to employees to participate in Agency-sponsored preventive health activities). 

e.	The supervisor may request medical documentation for an excused absence for preventive health screenings.

C.	Official Time

1.	Official time is not excused absence, but there may be situations where an employee is authorized to use official time to perform activities other than his/her normal duties.  The distinction can be very important because, for example, an employee injured while on excused absence may not be entitled to benefits under the Federal Employees’ Compensation Act (FECA), while an employee injured while on official time may be covered.

2.	Official time is included on the employee’s Time and Attendance Report as normal hours of work and is not entered as administrative leave.

3.	Supervisors may authorize official time in situations such as the following:

a.	For an employee serving as a labor organization representative. See 5 U.S.C. 7131 and applicable negotiated agreements

b.	For an employee representing another employee in an appeal, discrimination complaint, or grievance

c.	For an employee preparing a response to a notice of proposed adverse action

d.	For an employee meeting with an equal employment opportunity counselor

e.	For employees meeting with employee assistance staff for counseling

f.	For an employee who has prevailed in a civil rights action against the Department, the employee’s absence in connection with the action should be changed to official time (see 59 CG 290).  A determination to treat such an absence as official time can be made only upon conclusion of the court action.  While the court action is in process, the employee should request annual leave or leave without pay in accordance with 630-1-90(D)(3) 

g.	For employees to participate in fitness activities in order to help them meet job-related medical standards or physical requirements.

