
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
JUSTIFICATION FOR CREDITING PRIOR EXPERIENCE
TOWARDS AN EMPLOYEE’S ANNUAL LEAVE ACCRUAL RATE

The Office of Personnel Management issued interim regulations on April 28, 2005, to implement Section 202(a) of the Federal Workforce Flexibility Act of 2004.  Section 202(a) amends 5 U.S.C. 6303 to provide OPM with the authority to prescribe regulations under which a newly appointed or re-appointed employee who is covered by the Federal annual and sick leave program, may be given service credit for prior experience that otherwise would not be creditable for the purpose of determining the employee’s annual leave accrual rate.

OPM has added regulations at 5 CFR 630.205(a) to allow the head of an agency or designee the authority to grant a newly appointed or reappointed employee with service credit for annual leave accrual rate purposes based on prior non-Federal work experience or a period of active duty in a uniformed service.   

Employees Name:_____________________________	

Position, Pay plan, Series, Grade:__________________________________

Prior to granting such credit, the HR director must determine that this employee meets both of the following conditions through reviewing justifications from the requesting organization:

1.	The skills and experience that this employee possesses are essential to the new position and were acquired through performance in a non-Federal position having duties that directly related to the position to which he or she is being appointed.   Justification:






2.	The use of this authority is necessary to achieve an important agency mission or performance goal.  Justification:







Note:  The vacancy announcement, position description(s), and employee’s application package must be attached to this justification.  If the service credit is based on a period of active duty in a uniformed service, you must also attach the employees DD-214 documenting this service.

REVIEWS AND APPROVALS

OPDIV/Center Recommending Official’s Signature

	Title	Date
OPDIV/Center Approving Official’s Signature

	Title	Date
HR Director’s Signature
	Title	Date
HHS/OS/ASAM/OHR 9/14/05	
 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
CREDITABLE SERVICE FOR ANNUAL LEAVE ACCRUAL SERVICE AGREEMENT

Name (Type/Print First, Middle, Last) ___________________________________________________

In consideration of service credit I am receiving towards my leave accrual rate and service computation date for which I am entitled to under the policies of the Department of Health and Human Services, I hereby agree:

1.	To serve in (OPDIV)    ________________________________ for a minimum of 1 full year of continuous service.
2.	That I am a newly appointed employee or an employee who is being reappointed following a break in service of at least 90 calendar days after my last period of civilian Federal employment.
3.	That the amount of service credited to me shall be determined by the HR director or his/her designee as prescribed by the HHS policy for Credible Service for Annual Leave Accrual. The service credited under this agreement is __________years, ________months, _________days.
4.	That my annual leave accrual rate will be:    0 4 hours      0 6 hours    0  8 hours / bi-  weekly.
5.	That my service computation date for annual leave accrual purposes will be: ___/__/____.mm/dd/yyyyy
6.	That acceptance of this agreement does not alter the conditions or terms of my employment.
7.	That this credit of service is based solely on the position to which I am assigned and is not associated with my performance and/or conduct.  Accordingly, this agreement will not preclude nor limit the Department of Health and Human Services from effecting personnel actions as may be appropriate.
8.	That in the event I separate from Federal service or transfer to another agency or HHS OPDIV prior to completing one (1) full year of continuous service, my service computation date will be re-calculated subtracting the credit that I received under this agreement. 
9.	That HHS policy is incorporated into and made a part of this agreement and I have read this policy.


I ___________________________________________, agree to the terms of this agreement on  ___/__/____.
   Name (printed)										mm/dd/yyyyy

___________________________________________
Employee Signature
REVIEWS AND APPROVALS

OPDIV/Center Recommending Official’s Signature

	Title	Date
OPDIV/Center Approving Official’s Signature

	Title	Date
HR director’s Signature

	Title	Date
I certify that the information entered on this form is accurate and that the proposed service credit is in compliance with statutory and regulatory requirements.	HR Specialist’s Signature and Title	Date
	HHS/OS/ASAM/OHR
 

Certification of Qualifying Exigency for Military Family Leave
(Family and Medical Leave Act)


Instructions: This form is used to request qualifying exigency leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 6382 and 6383. Employees submit completed form and supporting documentation to the immediate supervisor for approval 30 days in advance of the event, if possible. Request may be denied if supporting documentation is not provided.


			
Employee’s Full Name	Telephone Number	E-mail Address	Today’s Date

Covered military member on active duty or call to active duty status in support of a contingency operation:

	Relationship of covered military member to you?

0  Daughter   0 Son    0 Parent   
0  Spouse

Full Name		Period of covered military member’s active duty

DOCUMENTATION: A copy of the covered military member’s active duty orders and supporting documentation are required as part of this request. Please check one of the following:

0A copy of the covered military member’s active duty or call to covered active duty orders is attached.
0Other documentation from the military certifying that the covered military member is on active duty (or has been notified of an impending call to active duty) in support of a contingency operations is attached. 
0I have previously provided my employer with sufficient written documentation confirming the covered military member’s active duty or call to active duty status in support of a contingency operation. 

QUALIFYING REASON FOR LEAVE: Briefly and specifically describe the reason you are requesting FMLA leave due to a qualifying exigency. Include sufficient information for the approving official to make a determination as to whether to grant exigency leave. Attach supporting documentation such as a copy of a meeting announcement for informational briefings sponsored by the military, documentation confirming an appointment with a counselor, childcare or school official, or legal or financial representatives, or post-deployment activities sponsored by the military, etc. Contact the human resources representative for questions regarding qualifying exigencies. 






AMOUNT OF LEAVE REQUESTED:

Approximate date qualifying exigency will being (or has begun)?  		Probable duration of exigency	

 

0Check here if you will you need to be absent from work for a single, continuous period of time due to the qualifying exigency. Include the beginning and ending dates for the period of absence (estimates are acceptable).




0Check here if you will need to be absent from work periodically/intermittently to address this qualifying exigency.  Provide a tentative leave schedule including the dates of any scheduled meetings or appointments. Estimate the frequency and duration of each appointment, meeting, or leave event, including any travel time (e.g., one deployment-related meeting every month, lasting four hours each).





Frequency:	     times per	0week(s)	0month(s)
Duration:	     hours or      day(s) per event

MEETING WITH THIRD PARTY:

Provide the contact information and a brief description of the nature of the meeting if leave is requested to meet with a third party (e.g., to arrange for urgent childcare, attend counseling, to make legal or financial arrangements, to act as the covered military member’s representative, etc.) 


		
Name of Individual	Title	Agency/Organization

		
Telephone Number	Email Address	

Nature of the meeting


		
Name of Individual	Title	Agency/Organization

		
Telephone Number	Email Address	

Nature of the meeting

 


		
Name of Individual	Title	Agency/Organization

		
Telephone Number	Email Address	

Nature of the meeting

CERTIFICATION – I certify that the information I provided above is true and correct.


		
Print Name	Signature of Employee	Date Signed

