
2.	Time Limit for Use of Restored Annual Leave—Except for Extended Exigency

a.	The maximum time limit for use of restored leave is the end of the leave year in which the 2-year anniversary date of restoration occurs.  Leave which is not used by this deadline may not be restored again.

b.	The date of restoration is determined as follows:

(i)	The date the annual leave was restored in correcting an administrative error; or

(ii)	The date fixed by management as the end of the exigency that resulted in the forfeiture of the annual leave; or

(iii)	The date the supervisor, after considering the medical documentation, ascertains that the employee is able to return to duty, if the leave was forfeited because of sickness or injury. 

c.	Employees with a restored annual leave account may use their regular annual leave and their restored leave in any order they choose, but they must advise their leave-approving official and the timekeeper of their choice.  Once an employee makes an election, he/she may not change it after the leave has been used.

3.	Time Limit for Use of Restored Annual Leave—Extended Exigency

a.	An extended exigency is defined as significant circumstances that meet all of the following conditions:

(i)	Threaten the national security, safety, or welfare;

(ii)	Last more than 3 calendar years;

(iii)	Affect a segment of an agency or occupational class; and

(iv)	Preclude subsequent use of both restored and accrued annual leave within the time limit specified in 630-1-40(F)(1)(e).

4.	The maximum time limit for use of annual leave restored because of an extended exigency is two years for each calendar year, or part thereof, that the exigency existed regardless of the number of years during the exigency in which the employee forfeited leave. 

G.	Lump-Sum Payment for Annual Leave

An employee with accumulated annual leave, including unused restored leave in a separate account, is paid a lump-sum at his/her current hourly rate for all unused annual leave at the time of separation.  If there is a general pay increase during the period of time which would have been covered by the leave had the employee actually used it, the employee is paid at the higher rate of pay for leave which would have covered the period following the effective date of the pay increase. The lump-sum payment may be adjusted to collect the amount of any debts owed to the Government.

630-1-50  	SICK LEAVE

A.	Granting Sick Leave

1.	A leave-approving official may grant sick leave to an employee for non-emergency dental, optical, or medical examination or treatment (including for physical or mental conditions).  The employee must request sick leave in advance for non-emergency purposes.

2.	If the employee has followed proper leave-requesting procedures and provides acceptable evidence, a leave-approving official must grant an employee’s request for sick leave (but is not required to grant a request for advance sick leave):

a.	When the employee is incapacitated to perform duties due to illness (physical or mental), injury, or temporary disability, including pregnancy. An employee with a disability who depends on an aid, mechanical or otherwise, to perform work is normally incapacitated without the aid.  A seeing-eye dog, a wheelchair, or any prosthetic device may be considered an extension of the person. Granting sick leave for such purposes as training, replacement, or repair is appropriate under the same conditions as any other incapacitation. 

b.	For emergency medical, dental, or optical examination or treatment.

c.	When an employee is required to care for a member of his/her immediate family with a serious health condition or to make arrangements for or attend the funeral of a family member. Full-time employees may not exceed a total of 104 hours or up to 13 days in a leave year for these purposes. The limitations for part-time employees or employees with an uncommon tour of duty are proportional to those for full-time employees. (See 5 CFR 630.401)

d.	A maximum of 30 days of sick leave may be advanced to a full-time employee at the beginning of a leave year or at any time thereafter in the case of a serious disability or ailment of the employee or family member or for purposes relating to the adoption of a child.  For a part-time employee or an employee on an uncommon tour of duty, the maximum amount of advanced sick leave must be prorated according to the number of hours in the employee’s regularly scheduled administrative workweek. (See 5 CFR 630.401)

e.	When the organization has made a determination that the employee is incapacitated and meets the requirements for disability retirement and the OPM is processing the employee’s retirement application.

f.	For treatment of a disabled veteran or adjudication of a claim concerning a job-related injury or illness, as described in 630-1-30(B)(1).

g.	When an employee is sick within a period of annual leave, provided that the employee presents medical documentation to support the sick leave immediately upon return to duty.

h.	When an employee would, as determined by the health authorities having jurisdiction or by a health care provider, jeopardize the health of others by his or her presence on the job because of exposure to a communicable disease.

i.	When an employee must be absent from duty for purposes relating to his  or her adoption of a child, including appointments with adoption agencies, social workers, and attorneys; court proceedings; required travel; and any other activities necessary to allow the adoption to proceed

3.	Upon request, the leave approving official may grant annual leave, if available, or leave without pay for a period of illness which cannot be covered by sick leave or advanced to the employee. However, annual leave must not be substituted retroactively for regular sick leave.  Annual leave may be substituted retroactively to liquidate an employee’s indebtedness for advance sick leave.
