
630-1-100 	MILITARY LEAVE

A.	Coverage

1.	An employee is entitled to time off at full pay for certain types of active or inactive duty in the National Guard or as a Reserve of the Armed Forces.

2.	Any full-time Federal civilian employee whose appointment is not limited to one year is entitled to military leave. Military leave under 5 U.S.C. 6323(a) is prorated for part-time career employees. 




B.	Types of Military Leave

1.	5 U.S.C. 6323 (a) provides 15 days per fiscal year for active duty, active duty training, and inactive duty training. An employee can carry over a maximum of 15 days into the next fiscal year. Inactive Duty Training is authorized training performed by members of a Reserve component not on active duty and performed in connection with the prescribed activities of the Reserve component. It consists of regularly scheduled unit training periods, additional training periods, and equivalent training. 

2.	5 U.S.C. 6323 (b) provides 22 workdays per calendar year for emergency duty as ordered by the President, the Secretary of Defense, or a State Governor. This leave is provided for employees who perform military duties in support of civil authorities in the protection of life and property or who perform full-time military service as a result of a call or order to active duty in support of a contingency operation. 

3.	5 U.S.C. 6323(c) provides unlimited military leave to civilian employees or individuals employed by the government of the District of Columbia, who is a member of the National Guard of the District of Columbia. Such employees are entitled to leave without loss in pay or time for each day of a parade or encampment ordered or authorized under title 39, District of Columbia Code. 

4.	5 U.S.C. 6323(d) provides that Reserve and National Guard Technicians only are entitled to 44 workdays of military leave for duties overseas under certain conditions.

C.	Crediting Military Pay Against Civilian Pay

1.	For employees entitled to military leave under 5 U.S.C. 6323(a), the employees retain the military pay as well as the civilian pay, including any premium pay (except Sunday premium pay) he/she would have received if not on military leave. 

2.	For employees entitled to military leave under 5 U.S.C. 6323(b) and (c), their civilian pay is reduced by the amount of military pay for the days of military leave. However, an employee may choose not to take military leave and instead take annual leave, compensatory time off for travel, or sick leave, if appropriate, in order to retain both civilian and military pay.

3.	For employees entitled to unlimited military leave under 5 U.S.C. 6323(c), the employee’s civilian pay is offset by the amount of the military pay.  (See 5 U.S. Code 5519.)

D.	Accumulating Military Leave

1.	Employees who are entitled to regular military leave but who do not use the entire 15 calendar days (or prorated earnings for part-timers) may carry over the unused portion from one fiscal year to the next. A maximum of 15 days can be carried over.

2.	Employees who are entitled to special military leave may not carry over any unused portion of the 22 work days to the next calendar year.



E.	Charges for Military Leave

1.	Military leave should be credited to a full-time employee on the basis of an 8-hour workday. The minimum charge to leave is one hour. An employee may be charged military leave only for hours that he/she would otherwise have worked and received pay.

2.	Employees who request military leave for inactive duty training (which generally is 2, 4, or 6 hours in length) are only charged the amount of military leave necessary to cover the period of training and necessary travel. 

3.	Employees may use up to 30 days of military leave in any fiscal year.  The military leave may be used during one or more periods of military duty during the fiscal year.

4.	Employees may take the full 15 days of military leave at the beginning of the fiscal year, even if the maximum of 30 days of military leave had been taken during the prior fiscal year and even if the military service is continuous. (See CG Decision B-241272.)

5.	For employees entitled to military leave under 5 U.S.C. 6323 (b), the leave is charged in the same increments as annual and sick leave.

6.	For employees entitled to-unlimited military leave for parades and encampments, the military leave is charged in increments of one day.  (See 60 CG 381.)

F.	Documentation

Employees called to military duty must furnish, to their leave-approving official, a copy of their military orders or a statement from their commanding officer.

630-1-110	 FUNERAL LEAVE

Up to three work days (per occurrence) may be granted for funeral leave to an employee in connection with the funeral of or memorial service for his/her immediate relative who died as a result of wounds, disease, or injury incurred while serving as a member of the armed forces in a combat zone.

Excused absence for funeral leave may also be granted to a veteran to enable him/her to participate in a military funeral as an active pallbearer or as a member of a firing squad or guard of honor. The maximum excused absence allowed in this instance may not exceed four hours in any one day.  

