
630-1-30 	GENERAL PROVISIONS

A.	Requesting and Charging Leave

Operating Divisions (OPDIVs) may prescribe the procedures for requesting leave (e.g., use of Standard Form 71, Request for Leave or Approved Absence, automated  time and attendance systems,  memorandum or verbal requests).

1.	The standard minimum charge for absence in pay status (leave) and for absence in non-pay status (leave without pay or absence without leave) is ¼ hour, except where OPDIV heads, or their designees, have established a minimum leave charge of ½ hour or one (1) hour.  (An employee must not be required to perform work during those periods of tardiness or unauthorized absence from duty for which the employee is charged with leave or absence without leave.)

2.	Leave is not charged for holidays or officially established non-work days, except in certain situations pertaining to leave without pay and absence without leave [See 630-1-30(D).]

B.	Mandatory and Discretionary Leave Approval

1.	When an employee has followed the proper procedures for requesting leave and provides acceptable medical evidence to support his/her absence,  the leave approving official must grant the employee’s request for sick leave, annual leave, or leave without pay when:

a.	An employee, who is a disabled veteran, presents an official statement from a medical authority that medical treatment is required in connection with the disability.  The employee must give prior notice of the period during which absence for treatment will occur.

b.	The employee has suffered an incapacitating job-related injury or illness, has exhausted any available continuation of pay, and is awaiting adjudication of a claim for employee compensation by the Office of Workers’ Compensation Programs.

c.	Leave requests meet the criteria for the Family Medical Leave Act. [See 630-1-30(H)]

2.	The leave approving official may grant advance sick or annual leave at his/her discretion.

C.	Uncommon Tours of Duty

For employees who work uncommon tours of duty during a regularly scheduled administrative work week (which is in excess of 40 hours in a calendar week), leave is charged for the number of hours of absence during the regularly scheduled tour. For example:

1.	An employee whose regularly scheduled tour of duty is 10 hours a day is absent for 8 hours and works 2 hours.  The employee is charged 8 hours leave.

2.	An employee whose regularly scheduled tour of duty is 44 hours a week is absent for a full week.  The employee is charged 44 hours leave.

D.	Leave Without Pay

1.	Leave without pay (LWOP) is approved leave for which the employee is not paid.  Employees do not have a right to LWOP except for specified situations such as:

a.	Disabled veterans for medical treatment for a service- connected disability

b.	Members of the Reserves or National Guard for military training duties

c.	Employees who are eligible for and invoke the Family Medical Leave Act (unless the employee opts to use accrued leave.)
