Human Resources Manual HHS Instruction 630-1, Leave and Excused Absence
Date:  December 17, 2010

Material Transmitted:

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 630-1, Leave and Excused Absence, December 17, 2010
Material Superseded:

HHS Instruction 630-1, Leave and Excused Absence, issued September 19, 2006.

Background: 

The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) issued final regulations to modify definitions related to family member and immediate relative in 5 CFR 630 and to add other defined terms related to the use of sick leave, funeral leave, voluntary leave transfer, voluntary leave bank, and emergency leave transfer in accordance with 5 CFR 630. The following revisions to this HHS Instruction were made: 

1.	Modified the definition of family member/immediate relative to make it more explicit and defined the terms committed relationship, domestic partner, parent, and son or daughter in accordance with 5 CFR 630.

2.	Corrected reference to family member in the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) coverage [630-1-30(H)(2)].  The FMLA statute and regulations do not include reference to family member or immediate relative. Rather, FLMA coverage specifically includes care for the employee’s spouse, son, daughter, or parent. 

Enactment of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2010 (Public Law 111-84, October 28, 2009) resulted in changes to the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) provisions for families of military service members.  The following revisions were made to this HHS Instruction:

1.	Provides a new entitlement to 12 administrative work weeks of unpaid exigency leave for federal employees (e.g., short-notice deployment, military events and related activities, urgent childcare and school activities, financial and legal arrangements, counseling, rest and recuperation, etc.)

2.	Expands the coverage for the 26-week entitlement for family members to care for a covered service member undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy for a serious injury or illness by amending the definitions of “serious injury or illness and “covered service member” to include veterans (if the veteran was a member of the Armed Forces at any time during the period of five years preceding the date on which the veteran undergoes the medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy).

3.	Addition of the Certification of Qualifying Exigency for Military Family Leave form.

Additional changes include:

1.	Exclusion of Commissioned Corps and update to 630-1-10 – Coverage – accordingly. 
2.	Removal of reference to interim policy in 630-1-120 - Creditable Service Based on Non-Federal Experience for Annual Leave Accrual.  Final regulations were effective October 18, 2006.

3.	Addition to 630-1-40 - Granting Annual Leave – to reflect the use of annual leave to establish initial eligibility for retirement or continuation of health benefits.

4.	Correction to 630-1-80 - Excused Absence- to reflect the number of days an employee may be excused to serve as an organ donor from 7 days to 30 days of paid leave. 

5.	Addition to 630-1-80 – Excused Absence - to update provisions for preventive health screenings. 

6.	Addition to 630-1-100 – Military Leave – to update the type of military leave available.

7.	Addition of 630-1-110 - Funeral Leave - in accordance with CFR 630, Subpart H – Funeral Leave and USC Title 5, 63.

8.	Update to 630-1-111 - Transfer and Re-credit of Leave between the Civil Service and Other Leave Systems – to remove reference to Commissioned Corps. The transfer of leave between the Commissioned Corps and the civil service personnel system is not authorized. 

In implementing this policy, OPDIVs/STAFFDIVs must meet their labor relations obligations covered under their Collective Bargaining Agreement, if applicable. This issuance is effective immediately. Implementation under this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.




Denise Wells
Assistant Secretary for Human Resources


INSTRUCTION 630-1
 
 
Human Resources Manual
Instruction: 630-1:  Leave and Excused Absence
Issuance Date:  December 17, 2010


HHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 630-1
LEAVE AND EXCUSED ABSENCE

630-1-00	Purpose
630-1-10	Coverage
630-1-20	References
630-1-30	General Provisions
630-1-40	Annual Leave
630-1-50	Sick Leave
630-1-60	Voluntary Transfer of Leave
630-1-70	Voluntary Leave Bank Program
630-1-80	Excused Absence
630-1-90	Court Leave
630-1-100	Military Leave
630-1-110	Funeral Leave
630-1-111	Transfer and Re-credit of Leave between the Civil Service and Other 				Leave Systems
630-1-120	Creditable Service for Annual Leave Accrual
630-1-130	Definitions

Attachment A	Justification for Crediting Prior Experience Towards an Employee’s Annual Leave Accrual Rate
Attachment B	Creditable Service for Annual Leave Accrual Service Agreement
Attachment C	Certification of Qualifying Exigency for Military Family Leave	

630-1-00	 PURPOSE

The purpose of this Instruction is to publish policy and establish Department-wide procedures and requirements for the use of leave and excused absence.  

630-1-10	COVERAGE

All Department employees are covered by this Instruction, except individuals appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate, Commissioned Corps Officers, and other employees excluded by 5 U.S. Code 6301.

630-1-20 	REFERENCES

A.	U.S. Code 5551 (law - lump-sum payment for accumulated and accrued leave on separation)

B.	U.S. Code, Chapter 63 (law - leave)

C.	U.S. Code 501(g) (law - lump-sum leave payments made to Commissioned Corps employees)

D.	5 CFR, Part 630 (regulations - absence and leave)

E.	HHS Personnel Instruction 550-11 (compensatory time off for religious observances)

F.	HHS Personnel Instruction 610-3 (temporary closing of work places)

G.	HHS Personnel Instruction 792-2 (employee assistance program)

H.	HHS Guide for Timekeepers

I.	HHS Travel Manual Chapter 1-40 (attendance at nongovernment sponsored meetings)

J.	General Accounting Office Civilian Personnel Law Manual, Title II (index and summaries of CG decisions concerning leave issues)

K.	Comptroller General Decision B-133674

L.	Comptroller General Decision B-241272

M.	Comptroller General Decision B-246359

N.	52 CG 66471

O.	60 CG 381

P.	61 CG 558

Q.	U.S. Code 6303 (annual leave; accrual)

R.	5 CFR 630.205 (absence and leave:  creditable service)

S.	5 U.S.C. 6302 (general provisions)

T.	Chief Human Capital Officers Council Transmittal: Recent Changes to the Family and Medical Leave Act CPM 2010-06 (3/5/10)

U.	48 CG 212; Decisions of the Comptroller General B-116314, B-11727

