
2.	In all other situations, management has the discretion to determine whether requests for LWOP will be approved.

3.	LWOP must not be granted when absence without leave (AWOL) is appropriate.

E.	Absence Without Leave

1.	AWOL is a non-pay status and shall be charged when an employee is absent without permission or has not notified his/her supervisor or provided satisfactory explanation or documentation for the absence from duty.  

2.	An AWOL charge may be changed to an appropriate type of leave if the leave-approving official determines that the employee has satisfactorily explained the absence or presented acceptable documentation.

F.	Charges to AWOL or LWOP for Holidays

Federal holidays that occur during a period of AWOL or LWOP are charged to AWOL or LWOP as follow:

1.	Employees in a non-pay status (AWOL or LWOP) immediately before and after a holiday are not entitled to pay for the holiday.  They must be charged AWOL or LWOP, as appropriate, for the holiday.  (Comptroller General Decision B-187520, February 22, 1977, and the HHS Guide for Timekeepers, Chapter 5, Unpaid Leave, March 2005.)

2.	Employees in a non-pay status (AWOL or LWOP) either before or after a holiday are not charged AWOL or LWOP for the holiday.  They are entitled to pay for the holiday.  It is presumed that the employee would have been available for work on the holiday unless the employee was in a non-pay status both before and after the-holiday.  (56 Comptroller General 393.)

3.	Employees scheduled to be on LWOP during a pay period when a holiday occurs must not be returned to pay status (i.e., duty or paid leave) either the day before or the day after the holiday for the sole purpose of taking advantage of being paid for the holiday.

G.	Repayment of Advance Leave by Employees Who Are Separating

Employees separating from the Federal service must repay any annual or sick leave advanced and not earned at the time of separation. Exception: repayment is not necessary under any of the following conditions:

1.	If the separation is because of entry into the military service with restoration rights.  (However, if the employee exercises the restoration rights, the leave indebtedness will be re-credited as an indebtedness.)

2.	If the separation is because of death or disability retirement.

3.	If the separation is based on a disability that prevents the employee from returning to duty or continuing in the service.

H.	Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA)

1.	Basic Leave Entitlement - Under the FMLA, employees are entitled to up to 12 weeks of leave without pay (LWOP). Exclusions: 

a.	Employees serving under intermittent appointments or temporary appointments with a time limitation of one year or less

b.	Employees with less than 12 months of Federal service

c.	Other individuals excluded under 5 CFR 630.1201(b).

2.	Employees may request FMLA:

a.	Because of the birth of a son or daughter of the employee and in order  to care for such son or daughter

b.	Because of the placement of a son or daughter with the employee for adoption or foster care

c.	In order to care for the spouse, or a son, daughter, or parent, of the employee, if such spouse, son, daughter, or parent has a serious health condition

d.	Because of a serious health condition that makes him/her unable to perform the functions of the employee’s position; and/or

e.	Because of any qualifying exigency arising out of the fact that the spouse, son, daughter, or parent of the employee is on covered active duty (or has been notified of an impending call or order to covered active duty) in the Armed Forces.

3.	Employees who do not comply with the notification and medical certification requirements of 5 CFR 630.1206 and 5 CFR 630.1207(b) are not entitled to FMLA leave.

4.	Holidays that occur during the period in which an employee is on family and medical leave are not counted toward the 12-week entitlement. [5 CFR 630.1203(e)]

5.	Military Leave Entitlement to Care for a Covered Service Member - The FMLA  provides military family leave entitlements for a Federal employee who (1) is the spouse, son, daughter, parent, or next of kin (i.e., nearest blood relative) of a covered service member with a serious injury or illness and (2) provides care for such service member.  

a.	Covered family members are entitled to up to 26 weeks of FMLA leave during a single 12-month period to care for the service member (hereafter referred to as “leave to care for a covered service member”.) 

b.	The serious illness or injury must have been incurred by the covered service member in the line of duty while on active duty in the Armed Forces. 

c.	During the single 12-month period, the employee is entitled to a combined total of 26 weeks of regular/basic FMLA leave to care for a covered service member.  For example, if during the single 12-month period an employee wants to take six weeks of regular FMLA leave for the birth of a child, as well as FMLA leave to care for a covered service member, the six weeks of regular FMLA leave is subtracted from the combined entitlement of 26 weeks, leaving the employee with 20 weeks of leave to care for a covered service member. 

d.	The use of this leave to care for a covered service member in a single 12-month period does not limit the use of regular FMLA leave during any other 12-month period.  For example, if an employee uses 26 weeks of FMLA leave to care for a covered service member during a single 12-month period but has not used any regular FMLA leave during that period, the employee would still be entitled to use up to 12 weeks of regular FMLA leave immediately following the single 12-month period.

e.	FMLA leave to care for a covered service member is unpaid leave for which an employee may substitute any accumulated annual or sick leave.  The normal leave year limitations on the use of sick leave to care for a family member do not apply; an employee may substitute annual or sick leave for any part of the 26-week period of unpaid FMLA leave to care for a covered service member.


I.	Certification of Qualifying Exigency

1.	Employees must provide 30 days advance notice, when possible, to his/her immediate supervisor to request FMLA leave for qualifying exigency. (See Attachment C - Certification of Qualifying Exigency for Military Family Leave.) 

2.	Employees must provide sufficient information to determine whether the request for exigency leave meets federal requirements and the anticipated timing and duration of the leave.

3.	Employees are required to provide a copy of the covered military member’s active duty orders or other documentation issued by the military only once unless the need for leave arises out of a different covered active duty or call to covered active duty status of the same or a different covered military member. 

