
4.	Leave-approving officials will usually charge sick leave only at an employee’s request. 

a.	Officials may, however, place an employee on sick leave without the employee’s request when the employee is absent under extenuating circumstances clearly indicating that he/she is unable to work and unable to request leave (e.g., the employee is in a coma). If the employee is still unable to work after exhausting his/her accrued sick leave and is unable to request appropriate leave, the leave-approving official may consider advancing sick leave or may consider charging the continued absence to annual leave or to leave without pay. In addition, the official may pursue use of the Voluntary Leave Transfer Program on behalf of the employee.

b.	In extraordinary circumstances, leave-approving officials may also place an employee on sick leave without the employee’s request if the employee reports for duty but is determined to be unable to work because of illness (mental or physical).  However, placing an employee on sick leave in this situation without his/her consent has been determined by the Merit Systems Protection Board to be a suspension, thus entitling the employee to notice and other due process protection.

B.	Advance Sick Leave

1.	An advance of sick leave may be made to an employee with a zero sick leave balance if the employee has a serious disability or ailment, provided the total advance at no time exceeds 30 days and there is a reasonable expectation that the employee will return to duty.  For an employee holding a limited appointment, sick leave must not be advanced in excess of the sick leave to be earned during the remaining period of employment.  Sick leave must not be advanced when it is likely the employee will retire, be separated, or resign before the advance leave will be earned.  Employees have no entitlement to advance sick leave.

2.	The employee’s request for advance sick leave must be in writing and must be supported by medical documentation acceptable to the leave-approving official in accordance with the respective collective bargaining agreement and instructions issued by the OPDIV.  Usually the disability or ailment will be of such seriousness as to require a period of absence of at least five consecutive work days, unless an absence for a shorter period is determined to be appropriate (for example, intermittent absences for chemotherapy, kidney dialysis, etc.)

3.	Advance sick leave may be granted regardless of whether the employee has annual leave to his/her credit.  Any sick leave earned after the sick leave is advanced will be used to liquidate the advance sick leave.

4.	An employee separated while indebted for advance sick leave must refund the amount due or have the amount owed deducted from any monies due to the employee.  For exceptions, see 630-1-30(F).

5.	As an alternative to advance sick leave, the employee and the supervisor may consider the Voluntary Leave Transfer Program, leave without pay, or an adjustment from full-time to part-time employment during a period of recuperation, thus allowing the employee to work less than eight hours daily until the employee is fully recovered.  In considering such options, the supervisor and the employee should consult the servicing personnel office regarding the effects of LWOP and part-time employment on the employee’s benefits, as well as possible employment ceiling implications in moving between full-time and part-time status.

C.	Evidence to Support Sick Leave

1.	Employees must submit evidence as required by their leave-approving official to support approvals of sick leave.  Officials have the discretion to require different forms of evidence depending upon the circumstances.  For example, a leave-approving official:

a.	May require medical documentation for extended absences, e.g., over three consecutive work days (or for shorter periods when an employee has been advised that medical documentation will be required).  Medical documentation is defined as that which is signed by the employee’s health care provider and is sufficiently specific for the leave-approving official to make a reasonable decision that the employee was incapacitated to perform the duties of his/her position.

b.	May require the employee’s signature on the SF 71, Request for Leave or Approved Absence, a written statement signed by the employee, or other evidence which is administratively acceptable to the leave-approving official when the period of absence is relatively short or the nature of the employee’s illness did not require an appointment with a health care provider.

2.	Employees must submit acceptable evidence or medical certification for a request for sick leave no later than 15 calendar days after the date the agency requests such medical certification.   If circumstances beyond the employee’s control prevent a timely submission despite the employee’s diligent good faith efforts, the employee must provide the evidence within a reasonable period of time, but no later than 30 calendar days after the date the agency requests such documentation. Failure to do so is grounds for disciplinary action for failure to follow proper leave procedures.  If the employee is placed on AWOL, the Merit Systems Protection Board has ruled that if the employee later submits adequate documentation, the AWOL cannot stand and any disciplinary action based solely on AWOL would be overturned.  However, an action based on failure to follow proper leave procedures could still be upheld.  An employee who does not provide the required evidence within the specified timeframe is not entitled to sick leave. 

3.	Leave-approving officials may require that employees submit medical documentation during a period of extended sickness. The purpose of such a requirement is to obtain information that is necessary for planning work or for determining that the approval of continued leave is appropriate (e.g., the health care provider’s prognosis of when the employee will be able to return to work; what limitations, if any, the physician will temporarily place on the employee’s activities; and, if applicable, what other work the employee could perform). 

