
Status During Notice Period. Except as noted below, an employee will remain in an active duty status during the notice period provided he/she reports for duty to his/her assigned post of duty or requests leave in accordance with standard procedures.
Nonduty, Pay Status. When there is a reasonable cause to believe an employee has committed a crime for which sentence of imprisonment may be imposed, the Agency may place an employee in a nonduty status with pay for a time not to exceed 10 calendar days and provide the employee a reasonable time, but not less than 7 calendar days, to respond to a proposed action. This shortened notice period is commonly known as the crime provision. Upon being informed of such a crime, the supervisor should consult with their HRO/HRC before placing the employee in a non- duty status.
There may be other situations, such as where there is a threat to employees or property (or information/databases), when placing an employee in a nonduty, pay status is appropriate. In such cases, HRO/HRC should be consulted.

Enforced Leave. Placing an employee on leave without his/her consent usually constitutes a disciplinary action subject to the notice requirements described above. There are few exceptions. No supervisor should impose leave without first consulting the HRO/HRC.
752-1-80 Records
The servicing HRO/HRC shall maintain confidential disciplinary/adverse action case files; each file shall contain copies of the notice of proposed action, any written answer, a summary of any oral answer, the notice of decision (including the reasons for it), any order effecting the action, and any supporting material (e.g., witness statements; affidavits; documents; investigative reports). Disciplinary/adverse action files must be provided to various parties (e.g., the MSPB; the affected employee and/or designated representative; a grievance examiner), but need only be furnished in response to a specific request. Records must be maintained and disposed of in accordance with government wide rule or regulation. This will include any management database maintained by the HRO/HRCs.


Appendix 752-1-A
PENALTY DETERMINATION
After establishing a sufficient basis for taking action (i.e., a preponderance of the evidence to support the charge(s); a nexus between the offense(s) and the employee's job or the agency's mission), the supervisor/manager, in consultation with the servicing HRO/HRC, must determine the appropriate penalty for the employee's misconduct.

The MSPB has determined that mitigation of an agency-imposed adverse action (removal, suspension of more than 14 calendar days, reduction in grade or pay, and furlough of less than 30 calendar days), is appropriate when the penalty is determined by the MSPB to be excessive, disproportionate to sustained charges, or arbitrary, capricious, or unreasonable. The MSPB in Douglas v. Veterans Administration, 5 M.S.P.R. 280 (1981), the MSPB identified a number of factors -- generally referred to as the "Douglas Factors" that must be considered in taking an adverse action. For all formal disciplinary actions, but especially adverse actions, supervisors/managers should be prepared to demonstrate that the following were considered:

The nature and seriousness of the offense, and its relation to the employee's duties, position, and responsibilities, including whether the offense was intentional or technical or inadvertent, or was committed maliciously or for gain, or was frequently repeated;
The employee's job level and type of employment, including supervisory or fiduciary role, contacts with the public, and prominence of the position;
The employee's past disciplinary record;
The employee's past work record, including length of service, performance on the job, ability to get along with fellow workers, and dependability;
The effect of the offense upon the employee's ability to perform at a satisfactory level and its effect upon supervisors' confidence in the employee's ability to perform assigned duties;
Consistency of the penalty with those imposed upon other employees for the same or similar offenses;
Consistency of the penalty with any applicable agency table of penalties;
The notoriety of the offense or its impact upon the reputation of the agency;
The clarity with which the employee was on notice of any rules that were violated in committing the offense, or had been warned about the conduct in question;
Potential for the employee's rehabilitation;
Mitigating circumstances surrounding the offense such as unusual job tensions, personality problems, mental impairment, harassment, or bad faith, malice or provocation on the part of others involved in the matter; and
The adequacy and effectiveness of alternative sanctions to deter such conduct in the future by the employee or others.
Not all 12 Douglas factors will apply in every case. The relevant factors must be balanced in each case to arrive at the appropriate penalty. Frequently, some of the pertinent factors will weigh in the employee's favor while others may not (or even constitute aggravating factors).

It is advisable that when addressing an adverse action case and considering the pertinent mitigating and/or aggravating factors, you do so in conjunction with the assistance of your servicing HRO/HRC.

