
752-1-60 Policy
A. General. Employees of the Department are expected to demonstrate high standards of integrity, both on and off the job, abiding by the Department's Standards of Conduct regulations (45 CFR Part 73) and other Federal and Departmental laws, rules and regulations. When established standards of conduct are violated, or the rules of the workplace are disregarded, corrective action is warranted to motivate employees to conform to acceptable behavioral standards and prevent prohibited and/or unsafe activities. Such corrective actions, when taken under this Instruction, should comport with applicable laws and regulations, should be administered with relative consistency and should be taken for such cause as will promote the efficiency of the service. Whenever appropriate, supervisors should consider using alternative discipline procedures in order to correct behavior while maintaining good and respectful working relationships.

B. Standard for Taking Action. Management must be able to show that the actions taken under this Instruction promote the efficiency of the service. To demonstrate this, the written notices of proposal and decision must clearly specify the charge(s) or reason(s) upon which the action is based, be able to prove the specific basis for the action by a preponderance of the evidence, be able to show the connection ("nexus") between the charge(s) and promotion of the efficiency of the service, and be able to establish the reasonableness of the action taken under the circumstances.

1. SES: In taking a corrective action against an appointee in the SES, management's options are limited to a written reprimand or an adverse action covered by this Instruction (i.e., suspension for more than 14 days; removal from the Federal service); management may take an adverse action against an SES employee only for misconduct, neglect of duty, malfeasance, or failure to accept a directed reassignment or to accompany a position in a transfer of function.

C. Use and Choice of Discipline. Discipline should be imposed to correct improper employee conduct and to maintain order, morale and workplace safety throughout the workforce. After determining that misconduct occurred and that corrective action is warranted, discipline should be initiated as soon as practicable after the misconduct which prompted it and effected on a progressive and equitable basis as much as possible. These progressive applications of penalties are known as progressive discipline. This concept should be applied in all cases except where penalties are prescribed by law, rule, or regulation; or instances where management deems the misconduct is egregious enough to warrant more serious action up to and including removal.

Management officials must exercise reasonable judgment and consider all relevant factors, both mitigating and aggravating (as reflected in the guidance found at Appendix A), in determining the most appropriate corrective action for each situation, including whether alternative discipline should be an option in a given situation. As a guide for considering disciplinary options, the Department's Guide to Corrective Action is included as Appendix B to this Instruction, as is the Guide to Alternative Discipline. These Guides do not mandate the use of specific penalties in most disciplinary situations. Supervisors/managers retain full authority, except in limited circumstances (i.e., discipline prescribed by statute or the MSPB), to set penalties as they deem appropriate, based on the particular circumstances and specifications of the offense. Consultation and close coordination with the servicing HRO/HRC should ensure that a particular penalty is proportional to the offense and employees who commit similar offenses are treated with relative consistency.

