
Instead of traditional discipline: If management decides to offer an employee alternative discipline instead of initiating the traditional disciplinary process, the servicing Employee/Labor Relations Specialist must first prepare a written analysis for management and the employee which identifies: 1. the employee's misconduct; 2. the law, rule, regulation, policy or procedure that was violated; and, 3. the traditional penalty that would have been proposed in the absence of alternative discipline.

The employee must be provided an opportunity to review the written analysis in order to make an informed choice between traditional and alternative discipline. If the employee chooses alternative discipline prior to the initiation of the traditional disciplinary process, he/she must be informed that in choosing alternative discipline at this stage, he/she waives Chapter 75 due process rights. The alternative discipline agreement must contain an explicit description of these waivers. The employee must also agree that if he/she fails to fulfill any term or condition of the agreement, the traditional penalty identified in the written analysis will be imposed without additional due process, including the right to grieve or appeal. See Exhibit 1.

During the traditional disciplinary process: Alternative discipline may also be offered at any time after the traditional disciplinary process has begun. For example, it may be offered after a notice of proposed suspension or removal has been issued, after the employee's oral and/or written reply to a proposal or after a decision has been reached. See Exhibit 2.

VII. What are some examples of alternatives to traditional disciplinary penalties?
There are a number of options that, singly or in combination, may be appropriate as alternatives to traditional penalties. These examples are not all inclusive and supervisors, employee relations offices and employees are encouraged to be creative and innovative in using the options on the following page as well as others while remaining within the confines of law and statute.

Donation of accrued annual leave to an approved recipient in the leave donor program or to the Agency's leave bank.
Leave without pay (LWOP) in lieu of suspension. (Note: an FLSA-covered employee cannot report to work during an LWOP period.)
Paper suspension, in which an SF-50 documenting a suspension of a specific number of days is placed in the employee's Official Personnel File, but the employee does not actually serve a suspension. He/she remains in active duty status, performing work and getting paid. The SF-50 could be removed from the OPF after an agreed upon period of time (2 years, 4 years).
Performance of unpaid, off-duty community service related to the offense. For example, instead of a 30 day suspension for drinking alcohol on the job, the employee agrees to perform 120 hours of community service in an alcohol abuse center. This must be documented to ensure that the employee performed the community service work.
Agreement to seek and actively participate in counseling through the Employee Assistance Program or other organization. This must be documented to ensure that the employee attends and participates and can be done without violating the employee's privacy.
Holding all or part of a suspension in abeyance for periods of time (generally one to two years) while the employee demonstrates acceptable conduct and/or performance.
Writing, developing and/or presenting a variety of e-mails, memoranda, instructional guides, training modules, etc., that explains a specific aspect of proper conduct and the potential consequences for violating approved standards.
Making restitution to either the Agency or the Department of Treasury for monies owed to the government for unauthorized personal long-distance phone calls, credit card charges, time and attendance abuse, "wasting" official time, etc.
VIII. What is the appropriate format for alternative discipline agreements and what standard terms should be included?
The samples in this Guide are examples of the recommended format for such agreements. They are presented in a commonly used settlement agreement format and clearly delineate the terms agreed to by management and the employee. Alternative discipline agreements, like settlement agreements, are considered to be contracts between parties. As such, whatever is spelled out in the document frames any future argument as to the meaning of various terms. Therefore, terms should be explicit, particularly those which explain what the employee will do in lieu of traditional discipline and the rights he/she is waiving.

At a minimum, all alternative discipline agreements should include the following:

A description of the misconduct and a statement that the disciplinary analysis resulted in a determination that a specified "traditional" penalty is warranted under formal disciplinary procedures. If alternative discipline is agreed to after initiation of the traditional process, attach the proposal and decision letters, as appropriate, to the agreement.
A statement in which the employee admits that he/she engaged in the improper conduct, recognizes the misconduct was unacceptable, and promises that these acts will not occur again.
A description of the terms and conditions that must be met for the employee to satisfactorily fulfill the agreement. The terms must include the timeframe(s) in which the employee must satisfy the agreement.
A clause addressing the retention of records associated with the agreement (such as the case file and a copy of the agreement). In most HHS agencies, 4 years is the retention period for disciplinary action files. The agreement should specify the agency's retention period.
A statement in which the employee agrees that if he/she fails to satisfy the terms and conditions of the agreement, the traditional penalty specified in the agreement will be effected immediately.
A statement that the agreement was entered into voluntarily and that the employee had the opportunity to seek the advice of a personal representative.
A statement that the misconduct addressed through the alternative discipline agreement constitutes an offense and may be used to support any future progressive disciplinary action(s), traditional or alternative.
A statement that the terms and conditions of the agreement are confidential but that they may be shared with parties who have an official need to know.
A statement that the terms and conditions of the agreement are nonprecedential, meaning they are specific to the employee, and may not be cited for comparison purposes in any other case.
If applicable, an acknowledgment that no salary or wage compensation can be requested for any off-duty volunteer service and that such service is not covered by Workers' Compensation.
The signatures of the parties to the agreement. At a minimum, this will include the employee and the supervisor or other management official authorized to enter into such an agreement. It may also include the employee's representative and/or the Employee/Labor Relations Specialist.
IX. How do you know when an alternative discipline process has concluded?
The terms and conditions of the alternative discipline agreement are considered fulfilled when the supervisor, in consultation with the Employee/Labor Relations Specialist, determines that the employee has satisfied the terms of the agreement.

When the terms and conditions of the alternative discipline agreement are satisfied, the supervisor or Employee/Labor Relations Specialist must certify such in writing to the employee. See the "Final Disposition" section of the sample alternative discipline agreements.

If the employee is unable to fulfill the terms and conditions of the alternative discipline agreement due to circumstances beyond his/her control, the parties should revise the agreement. For example, an employee would be unable to meet the terms of an agreement if it required the employee to perform 200 hours of community service within a six- month period, but the employee became incapacitated for five or six months due to an automobile accident.

If the employee fails to satisfy the terms and conditions of the agreement, the supervisor or Employee/Labor Relations Specialist will immediately issue a violation notice to the employee. The notice will inform the employee that the agreement has been breached and the traditional penalty specified in the agreement will be effected immediately. See Exhibit 3.

