
Reporting Fraud

All HHS and contractor employees have a responsibility to assist in combating fraud, waste and abuse in all departmental programs. As such you are encouraged to report matters involving fraud, waste and mismanagement in any departmental program(s) to OIG. To assist you, OIG maintains a hotline which offers a confidential means for reporting vital information.

Information is for official use only (For information on confidentiality please contact the hotline and ask about our confidentiality source program).
Each caller is encouraged to assist the OIG by providing information on how they can be contacted for additional information but caller may remain anonymous.

To the best of your ability, please provide the following information when contacting the Hotline:

Type of complaint:

Medicare Part-A
Medicare Part-B
Child Support Enforcement
National Institute of Health
Indian Health Service
Food and Drug Administration
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
Health Resources and Services Administration
Aid to Children and Families
All Other HHS Agencies or Related Programs

HHS department or program being affected by your allegation of fraud waste or abuse/mismanagement:

Administration for Children and Families (ACF)
Child Support Enforcement (CSE)
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS)
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Office of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
Indian Health Service (IHS)
Office of Inspector General (OIG)
Office of the Secretary (OS)
Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Administration (SAMSHA)
Administration on Aging (AOA)
Agency for Health Care Policy and Research Other (please specify)

Please provide the following, if you would like your referral to be submitted anonymously please indicate in your correspondence or phone call:

Your Name
Your Street Address
Your City/County
Your State
Your Zip Code
Your email Address

Subject/Person/Business/Department that allegation is against:

Name of Subject
Title of Subject (if applicable)
Subject's Street Address
Subject's City/County
Subject's State
Subject's Zip Code
Please provide a brief summary relating to your allegation.

Appendix 752-1-D
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
GUIDE FOR IMPLEMENTING AN ALTERNATIVE DISCIPLINE PROGRAM
Prepared by:

Office of Human Resources
Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management

September 10, 2002

TABLE OF CONTENTS
What is Alternative Discipline?
How does is work?
What are the criteria for using it?
How does it benefit the organization and the employee?
What other considerations are there?
At what stage of the process can it be used?
What are some examples of alternatives?
What kind of format should be used?
How do you know when the process is over?
Exhibit 1 - Sample Agreement
Exhibit 2 - Sample Agreement
Exhibit 3 - Sample Violation Notice
I. What is alternative discipline?
Alternative discipline is an alternative to traditional penalties for employee misconduct. It is a form of alternative dispute resolution that can be used to effectively resolve, reduce or even eliminate workplace disputes that arise from circumstances where disciplinary action is appropriate. The traditional penalties which alternative discipline generally replace are suspensions and removals. Last chance agreements (LCA) are a form of alternative discipline.

II. How does alternative discipline work?
The option to offer alternative discipline to an employee is the right of management, generally the supervisor or manager with authority to propose or decide disciplinary action against the employee. The process allows management and an employee who has committed an infraction to negotiate an alternative form of corrective action in lieu of traditional discipline, if some basic criteria are first met. The agreement between management and the employee is formalized in a written "Alternative Discipline Agreement" which details all of the terms and conditions used to resolve the situation.

III. What are the criteria for considering whether alternative discipline may be appropriate?
The traditional penalty for the misconduct is suspension or removal, and there is not a statutory/regulatory penalty for the infraction (i.e., a 30 day suspension for a first offense of "willful misuse of a government vehicle");
The employee acknowledges responsibility for the behavior(s) giving rise to the need for corrective/disciplinary action, expresses remorse for such behavior and agrees not repeat the behavior(s);
The manager determines that alternative discipline has a good probability of preventing further misconduct by the employee;
The employee agrees to waive all grievance, appeal and/or EEO complaint rights with respect to the particular action. The employee also agrees to waive grievance and appeal rights in connection with the particular instance of misconduct even if traditional discipline is later imposed because the employee fails to fulfill the terms of the alternative discipline agreement. However, an employee may not waive prospective EEO rights; and,
The use of alternative discipline in cases involving bargaining unit employees must not be precluded by the negotiated agreement. Note: Where a term of an alternative discipline agreement affects a condition of employment of one or more bargaining unit employees (other than employee whose conduct is at issue), management is obligated to notify the Union and give it the opportunity to exercise its representational rights.
IV. How does alternative discipline benefit the organization and the employee?
Less negative impact on supervisor/employee relationship. The interactive process of developing an alternative discipline agreement between the manager and employee can provide common ground for preserving or repairing the employer-employee relationship which is frequently unrecoverable after traditional discipline is imposed. The employee can be viewed as an individual who is willing to take responsibility for his/her actions and management can be viewed as willing to work with the employee and help restore or rebuild a cooperative work relationship. In addition, by actively participating in the process, an employee is more likely to fulfill the expectations agreed to and modify his/her behavior appropriately.
Productivity of employee. The organization retains the services of an employee instead of losing productivity in cases where the employee would have been given a traditional suspension. There is little or no interruption to the daily flow of work and no need to temporarily inconvenience co-workers who may have to pitch in while an employee is on suspension.
Quicker closure. Because cases resolved by alternative discipline agreements are closed more quickly than traditional cases and because they include waivers of grievance, appeal and complaint rights, the matter is resolved and closed with the signing of the agreement. There are no lingering issues or litigation to disrupt the work of the organization or the relationship between the employee, his/her supervisor and the organization as a whole.
Addresses the real purpose of discipline. In the Federal government, discipline is meant to be remedial and corrective rather than punitive. Alternative discipline, with its focus on a collaborative, constructive outcome, is truly remedial.
Time and resource savings. As described more fully in the next section, alternative discipline may be offered at any stage of the disciplinary process. When alternative discipline is used before a traditional penalty has been proposed or decided, a significant savings in time and resources can be realized for management, the employee and the servicing human resources office. The traditional disciplinary process can be protracted and even if alternative discipline is used after a decision has been made, additional time and resources to investigate and defend against complaints, grievances and appeals can be saved since the employee must waive all rights to contest the action.
V. What other considerations should be taken into account?
An agency may consider excluding some forms of misconduct from the alternative discipline process altogether because of the seriousness of the infractions (e.g., workplace violence, discrimination, reprisal/retaliation, and sexual harassment).
Decisions regarding whether to offer alternative discipline to an employee must be equitable. Like many other decisions, managers are expected to consider all relevant information and weigh the pros and cons of various options. With the criteria outlined above, a manager, with the assistance of his/her Labor/Employee Relations Specialist, should be able to arrive at an appropriate conclusion regarding whether to offer alternative discipline in a given situation.
VI. At what stage(s) of the disciplinary process may alternative discipline be considered?
Alternative discipline may be initiated instead of traditional discipline or at any stage of the traditional process.

