752: Discipline and Adverse Action
Issuance Date:
March 20, 2009

Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 752, Corrective Action, Discipline and Adverse Actions, dated March 20, 2009.

Material Superseded:
This constitutes new policy.

Background:
Consistent with the continuous improvement initiatives, the Department is issuing Instruction 752, Corrective Action, Discipline and Adverse Actions, which is established under the authority of regulations issued by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) found at Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 752, Adverse Actions.

The Instruction clarifies roles and responsibilities for managers when addressing employee misconduct in the workplace. It also establishes guidance and criteria to ensure that corrective action is consistent with good management practices.

This issuance is effective immediately. Implementation under this issuance must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

Antonia T. Harris
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management

INSTRUCTION 752
Subject: Chapter 752 Corrective Action, Discipline and Adverse Actions
752-1-00   Purpose
752-1-10   Authority
752-1-20   Coverage
752-1-30   Definitions
752-1-40   Abbreviations
752-1-50   Responsibilities
752-1-60   Policy
752-1-70   Guidelines
752-1-80   Records

Appendix 752-1-A   Penalty Consideration
Appendix 752-1-B   HHS Guide for Corrective Action
Appendix 752-1-C   OIG Guidance/Information
Appendix 752-1-D   Guide for Implementing Alternative Discipline Program

752-1-00 Purpose
This instruction sets forth the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) policy and guidelines for administering employee discipline and adverse actions, including resolution through alternative discipline. This instruction also establishes the authority and responsibility for taking appropriate corrective action for disciplinary or certain non-disciplinary reasons, when it is determined that such actions will promote the efficiency of the service. Discipline, including alternative discipline, is meant, where possible, to prevent recurrence of inappropriate conduct while maintaining good supervisor-employee relationships and retaining valued staff.

This Instruction, also communicates guidance for penalty considerations. Requirements stated in this Instruction are consistent with law, regulations and other Departmental policies applicable at the time of its issuance. Actions taken through the application of this Instruction must comply with the requirements of pertinent laws, rules and regulations, as well as the lawful provisions of applicable negotiated agreements for employees in exclusive bargaining units.

752-1-10 Authority
Chapter 75 of Title 5, United States Code and Part 752 of Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations.


752-1-20 Coverage
This Instruction applies to all Operating Divisions (OPDIVs) and offices of HHS, although those OPDIVs with an existing Table of Penalties may refer to those in conjunction with the attached Disciplinary Guide in Appendix B. In instances where an OPDIV Table of Penalties and the Department Disciplinary Guide differ, the stricter penalty will apply. Employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement may be subject to additional procedures which may supersede/supplement those described in this Instruction.
The disciplinary/adverse action procedures described in this Instruction do not apply to an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) or the U.S. Public Health Service Commissioned Corps, whose discipline is governed by separate regulatory and statutory requirements.
Department appointees in the Senior Executive Service (SES) are covered by Part 752-1-60B of this instruction.
Management must consult with the servicing Human Resources Office/Center (HRO/HRC) for guidance regarding employee/action coverage.
752-1-30 Definitions
Administrative Leave. An excused absence from duty without charge to leave or loss of pay.
Adverse Action. For purposes of this Instruction, a personnel action taken by management, appealable to the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB), to effect an employee's removal, suspension for more than 14 days, furlough without pay for 30 days or less, or reduction in grade or pay.
Alternative discipline (AD). An alternative to traditional discipline, usually when the traditional penalty would be less than removal.
Day. A calendar day (except where otherwise specified).
Deciding Official. A Department supervisor or manager who makes a decision on proposed adverse action or disciplinary action.
Disciplinary Action. For purposes of this Instruction, an action taken by management, not appealable to the MSPB (i.e., written reprimand; suspension for 14 days or less) to address employee misconduct.
Enforced Leave. Making the employee use his or her own sick or annual leave (after the 30-day notice period with pay) pending investigation, inquiry, or further agency action.
Furlough. The placement of an employee in a temporary status without duties and pay because of lack of work or funds or other non-disciplinary reasons.
Grade. A level of classification under a position classification system.
Indefinite Suspension. The placement of an employee in a temporary status without duties and pay pending investigation, inquiry, or further agency action. The indefinite suspension continues for an indeterminate period of time and ends with the occurrence of the pending conditions set forth in the notice of action which may include the completion of any subsequent administrative action.
Last Chance Agreements. Terms agreed to by an employee (or former employee) and an employer under which the employee will be given a last opportunity to keep or get back his or her employment, usually when the agency would otherwise remove (or has removed) the employee for performance, conduct, or leave deficiencies. Usually, though not always, such agreements provide for some waiver of appeal or complaint rights.
Pay. The rate of basic pay fixed by law or administrative action for the position held by an employee.
Preponderance of the Evidence. That degree of relevant evidence which a reasonable person, considering the record as a whole, might accept as sufficient to find that a contested fact is more likely to be true than untrue.
Proposing Official. A Department supervisor or manager who proposes an adverse or disciplinary action.
Removal. The involuntary separation of an employee from employment with the Department and Federal service, except when effected due to a reduction-in-force or the expiration of an appointment.
Suspension. The involuntary placement of an employee in a temporary non-duty, non- pay status for disciplinary reasons.
752-1-40 Abbreviations
AWOL           Absent Without Leave
CFR               Code of Federal Regulations
EAP               Employee Assistance Program
ERS               Employee Relations Specialist
GS                 General Schedule
HRO/HRC     Human Resources Office/Center
MSPB            Merit Systems Protection Board
OGC              Office of General Counsel
OIG                Office of Inspector General
OPDIV           Operational Division
OPF               Official Personnel Folder
OPM              Office of Personnel Management
OSC               Office of the Special Counsel
SES                Senior Executive Service
STAFFDIV      Staff Division
U.S.C.            United States Code
