3. CONDUCT PREJUDICIAL TO THE BEST INTERESTS OF THE SERVICE
a. Conduct which causes the employee to be indicted or charged with a criminal offense which is related directly to the duties of the employee's position or the mission of the Agency and for which a sentence of imprisonment may be imposed.	Indefinite Suspension (Until the outcome of the legal action is known and/or until the completion of appropriate administrative action.)	 
b. Conduct which causes the employee to be convicted of a criminal charge which is related directly to the duties of the employee's position or the mission of the Agency.	Removal	 
c. Off duty conduct which adversely affects the employee's job performance or trustworthiness, or adversely affects the ability of the Agency to accomplish its mission or otherwise identifiable nexus to the employee's position.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
d. Infamous or notoriously disgraceful conduct.	Removal	 
e. Concealing, removing, mutilating, altering or destroying Government records.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	14-Day Suspension to Removal
f. Malicious or intentional damage or loss of Government- owned or Government-leased property.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	14-Day Suspension to Removal
g. Using public office for private gain.	14-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
h. Unethical or improper use of official authority or credentials.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
i. Unauthorized disclosure or use of (or failure to safeguard) information protected by the Privacy Act or other official, sensitive, or confidential information.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
j. Having a direct or indirect financial interest that an employee could reasonably expect to be in conflict or appear to be in conflict with his or her official duties and responsibilities. (When a conflict of financial interest occurs that is inadvertent and that could not be reasonably anticipated by the employee, the situation would normally be handled by divestiture or recusation rather than disciplinary action.)	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
k. Engaging in outside employment or other activities without required prior approval.	Letter of Reprimand to 5- Day Suspension	14-Day Suspension to Removal
1. Improperly soliciting or accepting, directly or indirectly, a gift from any individual or establishment seeking or having a contractual or business relationship with the Department.	5-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
m. Improperly soliciting a contribution from another employee for a gift to an official superior, making a donation as a gift to an official superior, or accepting a gift from an employee receiving less pay.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
n. Borrowing money from a subordinate employee, securing a subordinate's endorsement on a loan, or otherwise having a subordinate assume the financial responsibility of a superior.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
o. Use of (or authorizing the use of) employees, or Government owned, leased or provided property, facilities, services or credit cards, for inappropriate or non-official purposes.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	5-Day Suspension to Removal
p. Willful use of (or authorizing the use of) any Government-owned or Government-leased passenger vehicles or aircraft for other than official purposes.	30-Day Suspension to Removal [31 U.S.C. 1349(b) mandates a minimum penalty of a one month suspension for unofficial use of Government passenger carrying vehicles or aircraft.]	Removal
q. Use of (or authorizing the use of) other Government- owned or Government-leased vehicles such as trucks, aircraft, boats or other motor vehicles for other than official purposes.	30-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
r. Carrying of unauthorized passengers in Government- owned or Government-leased vehicles such as trucks, aircraft, boats or other motor vehicles for other than official purposes.	Letter of Reprimand to 14-Day Suspension	14-Day Suspension to Removal
s. Unauthorized use, removal or possession of a thing of value belonging to another employee or private citizen.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
t. Misuse of the internet; misuse of the electronic mail; visiting websites or downloading material from the internet during duty time for non-official use; sending electronic mail for unauthorized purposes; misuse of data bases and other software for personal gain.	Reprimand to Removal	3-Day Suspension to Removal
u. Fighting, threatening, attempting to inflict or inflicting bodily harm while on Government premises and/or when in a duty status.	5-Day Suspension to Removal	14-Day Suspension to Removal
v. Use of abusive, offensive, unprofessional, distracting, or otherwise unacceptable language, gestures, or other conduct; quarreling; creating a disturbance or disruption; or horseplay.	Letter of Reprimand to 14-Day Suspension	5-Day Suspension to Removal
w. Use of slanderous, malicious, derogatory, discourteous, or otherwise inappropriate language, gestures, or other conduct toward employees, supervisors, or the public.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	5-Day Suspension to Removal
x. Failure to pay just debts in a timely and proper manner.	Letter of Reprimand to 14-Day Suspension	1-Day Suspension to Removal
y. Gambling on duty or in work areas.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
z. Participating in a strike, work stoppage, slowdown, sickout, or similar activity.	Removal	 
