
Appendix 752-1-B
Guide for Corrective Action
This Guide is intended for use in determining the most appropriate charges and penalties for behavior(s) or action(s) which warrant corrective/remedial action and helps to ensure a relative consistency of penalties for like offenses. Users should consider the Nature of Offense column as a listing of general categories of offenses and not use it as the specific terminology in framing charges; it is not all-inclusive and is not intended to address every conceivable disciplinary situation. Managers should be careful to avoid force-fitting an offense or charge into an existing category. Rather, the Table is to be used as a guide for selecting a charge and penalty that fits a particular situation.

The Guide lists only formal disciplinary actions (i.e., those which become a matter of record in the employee's OPF). It does not mention oral warnings, counseling letters, and similar actions which are considered informal disciplinary actions and may be more appropriate for correcting minor offenses. The First Offense column, therefore, refers to the first offense for which formal discipline is being administered, although it may not be the first time a violation has occurred.

The offenses need not be identical or similar in order to support progressively more severe action against an employee. A second offense need not be related to the first offense to support a more severe penalty. The penalties suggested in the Guide are guidelines only; nothing precludes management from proposing and then imposing no penalty, or a lesser or more severe penalty than that offered by the Guide, as circumstances warrant. Such circumstances, however, should be fully documented in the decision letter. (Note that a deciding official cannot impose a more severe penalty than that originally proposed in the proposal letter.)

DISCIPLINARY GUIDE
HHS GUIDE FOR DISCIPLINARY PENALTIES
NATURE OF OFFENSE                                                                                          	PENALTY FOR FIRST OFFENSE                                                                             	PENALTY FOR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE                                    
1. FISCAL IRREGULARITIES (Penalty depends on the monetary value, position held, personal benefit, and/or other pertinent factors.)
a. Submission of (or causing or allowing the submission of) falsely stated time logs, leave forms, travel or purchase vouchers, payroll, loan, or other fiscal document(s).	Letter of Reprimand to Removal, if for administrative convenience or to avoid following required procedures.	Removal
 	14-Day Suspension, if it results in personal benefit to another.	Removal
 	Removal, if it results in personal benefit.	 
b. Unauthorized and/or improper use of property, Government or other funds, or any other thing of value coming into an employee's custody as a result of employment.	14-Day Suspension to Removal           	Removal
c. Failure to properly account for or make proper distribution of any property, Government or other funds, or any other thing of value coming into an employee's custody as a result of employment.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
d. Concealment of (or failing to report) missing, lost, or misappropriated funds, or other fiscal irregularities.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	14-Day Suspension to Removal
2. FALSE STATEMENT(S)/INCORRECT OFFICIAL DOCUMENTS (False statements or entries in connection with fiscal matters and documents are covered in 1. above.)
a. Deliberate falsification of an application for employment, or other personal history record by omission or by making a false entry.
Note: If an incorrect or inaccurate entry or statement is determined to be unintentional, other (non-disciplinary) action should be taken.	Removal, if it would have adversely affected selection for appointment or promotion.	 
 	Letter of Reprimand to 14-Day Suspension, if it would not have adversely affected selection for appointment or promotion.	14-Day Suspension to Removal
b. Misrepresentation, falsification, or concealment of material facts or documents in connection with an official matter, including an investigation.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
c. Knowingly and willfully making an incorrect entry on an official document or approving an incorrect official document.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	14-Day Suspension to Removal