4. FAILURE/REFUSAL TO FOLLOW INSTRUCTION
a. Negligence, including the careless failure to comply with rules, regulations, written procedures, or proper supervisory instructions.	Letter of Reprimand to 14-Day Suspension	5-Day Suspension to Removal
b. Deliberate or malicious refusal to comply with rules, regulations, written procedures, or proper supervisory instructions.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	14-Day Suspension to Removal
c. Refusal to provide information to authorized representatives of the Department or other Government Agencies when called upon, when the inquiry relates to official matters and the information is obtained in the course of employment or as the result of relationships incident to such employment.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
d. Failure to report for duty as detailed, transferred, or reassigned.	Removal	 
e. Failure to submit required statements of financial interests and outside employment.	Letter of Reprimand to 3-Day Suspension	5-Day Suspension to Removal
5. NEGLECT OF DUTY
Careless/negligent work, loafing, sleeping on duty, wasting time, conducting personal business while on duty.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	5-Day Suspension to Removal
6. ATTENDANCE-RELATED OFFENSES (Penalty will depend on the circumstances, including length, frequency, and nature of position. To support disciplinary action, tardiness and unauthorized absences from the work place must be charged to AWOL on the employee's Time and Attendance (T&A) Report.)
a. Unexcused tardiness, including delay in: (1) reporting at the scheduled starting time, (2) returning from lunch or break periods, and (3) returning from an authorized absence from the work station.	Letter of Reprimand to 1-Day Suspension	5-Day Suspension to Removal
b. Unauthorized absence, including leaving the workstation without permission or before the end of the workday. [Time periods at right refer to the accumulated total amount of AWOL for each offense (i.e., disciplinary action proposed) rather than for each instance or occurrence of unauthorized absence. For example, if an employee is AWOL on three separate occasions and the total amount of AWOL shown on the T&As is more than 8 hours but less than 5 workdays, the proposed penalty for a first offense would normally be a suspension of from 1 to 14 days.]	Absences of 8 Hours or Less
Letter of Reprimand to 5- Day Suspension	5-Day Suspension to Removal
Absences of More Than 8 Hours But Less Than 5 Workdays
1-Day Suspension to 14-Day Suspension	14-Day Suspension to Removal
Absences of 5 Workdays or More
14-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
7. INTOXICANTS -- Alcohol and Spirits (Agencies must assure the requirements of alcohol abuse programs are met before taking action.)
a. Unauthorized use of intoxicants while on duty, on Government property or Government- controlled property or premises where official duties are performed.	Letter of Reprimand to 14-Day Suspension	30-Day Suspension to Removal
b. Reporting to or being on duty while under the influence of intoxicants.	Letter of Reprimand to 30-Day Suspension	30-Day Suspension to Removal
c. Operating a Government-owned or Government- leased vehicle (or privately-owned vehicle on official business) while under the influence of intoxicants.	Removal [If a penalty of less than removal is determined to be appropriate, agencies should (at a minimum) suspend the employee's official driving privileges for a period of one year.]	 
8. ILLEGAL DRUGS/DRUG PARAPHERNALIA/CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES (HHS will not initiate disciplinary action when an employee -- (1) Voluntarily identifies him/herself as a user of illegal drugs prior to being identified through other means, (2) Obtains counseling and rehabilitation through EAP and (3) Thereafter refrains from illegal drug use. In all other circumstances, agencies must make appropriate referrals to the EAP and initiate appropriate disciplinary action.)
a. Possession of an illegal drug, drug paraphernalia, or unauthorized controlled substance while on duty, on Government property or Government-controlled property, or on premises where official duties are performed.	5-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
b. Use of an illegal drug or unauthorized controlled substance while on duty, on Government property or Government-controlled property, or on premises where official duties are performed.	14-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
c. Reporting to or being on duty while under the influence of an illegal drug or unauthorized controlled substance.	14-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
d. Sale or distribution of an illegal drug or controlled substance.	Removal	 
e. Operating a Government-owned or Government- leased vehicle (or privately-owned vehicle on official business) while under the influence of an illegal drug.	Removal	 
f. Interfering with, or refusing or failing to submit to a properly ordered or authorized drug test, including substituting, adulterating, or otherwise tampering with a urine sample.	Removal	 
g. Use of an illegal drug or unauthorized controlled substance during non-duty hours and on non-work premises.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
