9. PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY
Engaging in the types of political activity prohibited by law or by Office of Personnel Management regulations.	Removal, 5 U.S.C. 7326	Note: Referral to Office of Special Counsel is required.

Only the MSPB may mitigated to a penalty of not less than 30 days;
10. SAFETY AND HEALTH VIOLATIONS (Penalty should take into consideration whether danger to persons or property is involved.)
a. Failure to report an accident and/or injury as required.	Letter of Reprimand to 14-Day Suspension	14-Day Suspension to Removal
b. Failure or refusal to wear/use required protective equipment (e.g., seat belts, earplugs, eye protection, etc.).	Letter of Reprimand to 14-Day Suspension	14-Day Suspension to Removal
c. Operation of a Government-owned or Government- leased vehicle (or privately-owned vehicle while on official business) without an appropriate State driver's license.	5-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
d. Failure or refusal to observe and/or enforce Safety and Health regulations or to perform duties in a safe manner.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	5-Day Suspension to Removal
11. DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES (Penalty should take into consideration whether violation is willful/deliberate, or careless/negligent.)
a. Acting or failing to act on an official matter (including a personnel action) in a manner which improperly takes into consideration an individual's political affiliation, race, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age, or handicapping condition. [This includes discrimination for or against any employee or applicant for employment prohibited by 42 U.S.C. 2000e-16; 29 U.S.C. 631 or 633a; 29 U.S.C. 206(d); 29 U.S.C. 791; or any other law, rule, or regulation.]	5-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
b. Any reprisal or retaliation action against an individual involved in the EEO complaint process.	5-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
c. Use of remarks which relate to and insult or denigrate an individual's race, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age, or handicapping condition.	Letter of Reprimand to 30-Day Suspension	14-Day Suspension to Removal
d. Negligence or insensitive conduct with respect to an individual's race, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age, or handicapping condition which is determined to be discriminatory and where there is no other finding of overt discrimination.	Letter of Reprimand to 5-Day Suspension	5-Day Suspension to Removal
e. Failure to take appropriate action regarding allegations or findings of discriminatory practices.	5-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
12. SEXUAL MISCONDUCT
a. Actual or attempted sexual assault (e.g., rape)	Removal	 
b. Inappropriate and/or unwelcome touching or other physical contact.	14-Day Suspension to Removal	30-Day Suspension to Removal
c. Pressure for (or official action based on) sexual favors, including taking action favorable to an employee because of the granting of a sexual favor or denying an action favorable to an employee because of the withholding of a sexual favor.	30-Day Suspension to Removal	Removal
d. Inappropriate and/or unwelcome teasing, jokes, actions, gestures, display of visual material of a sexual nature or remarks of a sexual nature.	Letter of Reprimand to 30-Day Suspension	14-Day Suspension to Removal
13. PROHIBITED PERSONNEL PRACTICES (Not elsewhere covered.)
Abuse of authority and commission of a prohibited personnel practice covered by 5 U.S.C. 2302.	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
14. SCIENTIFIC MISCONDUCT	Letter of Reprimand to Removal	Removal
Appendix 752-1-C
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL INFORMATION
Report Fraud

Phone:
1-800-HHS-TIPS
(1-800-447-8477)

Fax:
1-800-223-8164

TTY:
1-800-377-4950

E-Mail:
HHSTips@oig.hhs.gov

Mail:
Office of Inspector General
Department of Health and Human Services
Attn: HOTLINE
PO Box 23489
Washington, DC 20026

