
752-1-70 Guidelines
A. General. Taking a corrective action against an employee is appropriate only when the employee has engaged in identifiable misconduct adversely affecting the efficiency of the service. Before initiating such action, management should conduct a thorough inquiry into any apparent offense (collecting information to the greatest extent practicable directly from the subject employee) to ensure the objective consideration of all relevant facts and aspects of the situation. Ordinarily, this inquiry will be conducted by the appropriate line supervisor or designee, with guidance from the servicing HRO/HRC. However, certain situations (particularly those involving possible criminal activity) warrant an investigation by the OIG or other law enforcement such as the Office of Internal Affairs, Federal Protective service or local police department.

Once it is established that an employee engaged in misconduct necessitating corrective action, a supervisor or other management official (using the guidance at Appendices A and B, and in consultation with the servicing HRO/HRC) must determine the action/penalty required to deter the recurrence of the unacceptable behavior.

Under the best of circumstances, minor misconduct should be corrected through informal supervisory counseling advising the employee promptly after the first instance of unacceptable behavior. The supervisor also may rely on notices of warning/admonishment and alternative discipline to convince the employee to change the undesirable behavior. These actions are less severe than or equivalent to the disciplinary and adverse actions described below, are less subject to review by third parties, and do not become part of the employee's permanent official employment record. Notices of warning/admonishment document the employee's misconduct, place the employee on notice regarding the behavior expected by management, and advise the employee that more serious corrective action (e.g., reprimand; suspension; removal) will result if the unacceptable behavior is not corrected. The use of such corrective actions does not constitute a "prior penalty" for disciplinary purposes to increase the severity of penalty for a subsequent offense; however, such corrective actions may be viewed as "prior notice." The use of alternative discipline, however, can constitute "prior penalty," either for a specific timeframe or for an indefinite period.

B. Means of Handling Misconduct

Counseling or Verbal Warnings should be used by the supervisor when:
Infractions are minor and infrequent; and
The supervisor determines that counseling and/or verbal warnings will likely preclude a recurrence of the misconduct.
Formal discipline is not warranted.
Warns that disciplinary action may result if the unacceptable conduct continues.
Is not a formal disciplinary action.
Is not maintained in the employee's OPF. That he/she may grieve the issuance of the letter of admonishment, caution or warning, by following the grievance procedures in HHS Instruction 771-3 or a negotiated grievance procedure, whichever is applicable.
A Letter of Admonishment, Caution, or Warning issued by the supervisor:
Serves as a written notice, and/or confirmation of counseling, and/or verbal warning that conduct is unacceptable.
Warns that disciplinary action may result if the unacceptable conduct continues.
Is not a formal disciplinary action (however may be considered appropriate corrective action).
Is not maintained in the employee's OPF.
The employee may grieve the issuance of the letter of admonishment, caution or warning, by following the grievance procedures in HHS Instruction 771-3 or a negotiated grievance procedure, whichever is applicable.
A Letter of Reprimand:
Is a formal disciplinary action.
May be issued without formal advance notice or proposal.
Will inform the employee:
Of the specific acts for which he/she is being reprimanded.
That a copy will be maintained in his/her OPF for determined length of time not to exceed 2 years.
That s/he may grieve the issuance of the letter of reprimand, by following the grievance procedures in HHS Instruction 771-3, or a negotiated grievance procedure, whichever is applicable.
That a repetition of the offense or other improper conduct may lead to more severe disciplinary action, up to and including removal from the Federal service.
A Disciplinary Action for a Suspension of 14 Calendar Days or Less, the employee is entitled to:
A written notice which states the charge(s) and reason(s) for the proposed suspension specifically and in detail.
Be represented by an attorney or other eligible representative.
An amount of official time, up to 4 hours or in compliance with the applicable negotiated agreements, to secure affidavits and prepare a written and/or oral answer.
The opportunity to review all material relied upon to support the reason(s) for the proposal.
The opportunity to submit a written and/or oral reply, up to 7 days or in compliance with the applicable negotiated agreements, to the proposal and consideration of the reply before a decision is made.
A written decision before the effective date of the suspension (and at the earliest practicable date) which provides the reason(s) for the suspension, and the right to file a grievance or EEO complaint.
An Adverse Action for a Suspension of More Than 14 Calendar days, the employee is entitled to:
A written notice stating all charge(s) and all reason(s) for the proposed suspension at least 30 calendar days in advance of the effective date of any decision.
Be represented by an attorney or other eligible representative.
An amount of official time, up to 4 hours or in compliance with the applicable negotiated agreements, to secure affidavits and prepare a written and/or oral answer.
The opportunity to review all materials relied upon to support the reason(s) for the proposal.
The opportunity to submit a written and/or oral reply, up to 14 days or in compliance with the applicable negotiated agreements, to the proposal and consideration of the reply before a decision is made.
A written decision before the suspension is effective (and at the earliest practicable date) stating which of the reasons in the advance notice have been sustained, and which have not been sustained.
The right to appeal a decision to suspend for more than 14 calendar days to the MSPB or to grieve the matter through a negotiated grievance procedure when applicable, but not both.
The right to file an EEO complaint if the employee believes the action was taken as the result of discrimination.
X  Reduction in Grade and Pay may be warranted as a result of misconduct:

When the employee cannot be continued in his/her present position;
Reassignment at his/her present grade is not possible or practical; and
When there is a reasonable belief that the misconduct will not or cannot continue at a lower grade level.
NOTE: Alternative discipline may be considered in all the above instances of discipline.

X  Removal action is taken only:

Where removal is specified by law; or
As warranted by the misconduct in question.
Removal action is taken by following the procedures described above for A Suspension of More Than 14 Calendar Days.
In certain cases, Last Chance Agreement may be an appropriate option to consider.
NOTE: The procedural requirements described above for A suspension of More Than 14 Calendar Days and Removal, apply in processing a demotion as a result of misconduct. (These procedures do not apply to a demotion which is a result of a reclassification of a position or a voluntary downgrade.) The above actions are taken only to promote the efficiency of the service and must be in consultation with the ERS.
