771-1-30 REFERENCES
A. Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 771, Agency Administrative Grievance System
B. Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 1201, Practices and Procedures (Merit Systems
Protection Board)
771-1-40 DEFINITIONS
A. Grievance: A matter of concern or dissatisfaction presented by an employee for which
personal relief is requested and could be granted. Personal relief must constitute action
concerning the employee presenting the grievance and cannot be an action concerning or
against another employee.
B. Informal Grievance: A matter of concern or dissatisfaction presented by an employee at
the first stage of the grievance process.
C. Formal Grievance: A matter of concern or dissatisfaction presented by an employee in
writing at the final stage of the grievance process.
D. Stage One Official: The first official within the Department with authority over the
matter at issue in the grievance. (It is the matter at issue rather than the relief sought that
determines the Stage One Official)
E. Stage Two Official: The official with delegated authority to issue the formal grievance
decision. This official must be "at a higher level than any employee involved in any
phase of the grievance, except when the Head of a Staff Division or Operating Division
has been involved." Similarly, for performance appraisal grievances, this official must be
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 5
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
a person at a higher level in the organization than the appraising, reviewing, or approving
official.
F. Discrimination: Discrimination means illegal discrimination because of race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or age when the complainant
is 40 years of age or over.
771-1-50 RESPONSIBILITIES
A. Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management (ASAM), Office of Human
Resources (OHR), is responsible for:
1. Updating and maintaining this policy.
2. Advising Operating Human Resources Organizations on the administration and operation of
grievance systems.
3. Reviewing and approving all Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) Systems prior to
implementation and ensuring that the systems comply with all applicable statutes,
regulations, and policies.
B. Operating Divisions (OPDIVs) and Staff Divisions (STAFFDIVs) are responsible for:
1. Ensuring that all grievances presented get a thorough and meaningful review, and that
employees who file grievances receive a final written decision that fully explains whether the
relief requested will be granted or not and the reasons for that decision.
2. Making final grievance decisions in regard to grievances presented by employees of the
OPDIV or STAFFDIV (a sample format for a grievance decision is enclosed as Exhibit B).
3. Drafting any local supplemental administrative grievance procedures.
4. Designing, implementing, and maintaining any ADR System made available to OPDIV or
STAFFDIV employees as an alternative to the Administrative Grievance System. Any ADR
implemented is supplemental to the Administrative Grievance System and its use must be
optional for employees. In addition, any ADR, prior to implementation, must be submitted
to the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management for review prior to
implementation.
C. Operating Human Resources Organizations are responsible for:
1. Administering the Administrative Grievance System for their component(s).
2. Ensuring that formal grievances are processed in accordance with this instruction and any
applicable local procedures.
3. Making available copies of this instruction and any local grievance procedures to all
employees to whom human resources services are provided.
4. Advising employees of the procedures for filing a grievance and their rights and
responsibilities in doing so.
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 6
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
5. Advising managers on issues presented in grievances and whether types of relief requested
can or cannot be granted.
6. Drafting correspondence and decision letters for use by managers in processing and deciding
grievances.
