HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 1
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 771-1, Administrative Grievance Procedure, dated
June 5, 2008.
Material Superseded:
HHS Instruction 771-3, employee Grievances, dated March 7, 1995.
Background:
Consistent with the continuous improvement initiatives, the Department has updated the prior Employee Grievance
instruction by replacing it with the Administrative Grievance Procedure. This instruction has been
established under the authority of regulations issued by the Office of Personnel Management
(OPM) found at Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 771, Agency Administrative
Grievance System.
The instruction clarifies roles and responsibilities for managers when addressing employee grievances. It
provides guidance to employee for filing an administrative grievance. It more specifically identifies matters which
are grievable and non-grievable.
This issuance is effective immediately. Implementation under this issuance must be carried out
in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental
policy.
 Antonia T. Harris
 Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
 Assistant Secretary for Administration and
Management
INSTRUCTION 771-1
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 2
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
SUBJECT: ADMINISTRATIVE GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
771-1-00 Purpose
771-1-10 Coverage and Exclusions
771-1-20 Grievable and Nongrievable Matters
771-1-20 References
771-1-30 Definitions
771-1-40 Responsibilities
771-1-50 General Provisions
771-1-60 Informal Resolution
771-1-70 Procedures
771-1-80 Reporting and Accountability
Exhibit A: Sample Grievance Format
Exhibit B: Sample Decision Format
771-1-00 PURPOSE
This instruction sets forth the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Administrative
Grievance Procedure. It does not pertain to grievances of bargaining unit employees which are
covered by the negotiated grievance procedure in a collective bargaining agreement or to
Commissioned Corps Officers. The Departmental grievance procedures have been established
under the authority of regulations issued by the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) found
at Title 5, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 771, Agency Administrative Grievance System.
771-1-10 COVERAGE AND EXCLUSIONS
A. Coverage
This instruction applies to all HHS civil service employees who are not part of a bargaining unit
regardless of grade or tenure. HHS Operating Divisions may supplement the provisions of this
instruction with local administrative grievance procedures. Any local administrative grievance
procedures must fully comply with the provisions of this instruction, and this instruction is
overriding as to matters of administrative grievance policy
B. Exclusions
1. Bargaining unit employees must use the negotiated grievance procedure contained in their
respective collective bargaining agreement as the exclusive avenue of redress for matters of
concern or dissatisfaction
2. This policy does not apply to grievance procedures for Commissioned Corps Officers.
771-1-20 GRIEVABLE AND NONGRIEVABLE MATTERS
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 3
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
A. Grievable Matters
Except as discussed under Nongrievable Matters, the grievance system is available to resolve
matters of concern or dissatisfaction relating to the employment of an individual and under the
control of agency management. This includes any matter in which an employee alleges that
coercion, reprisal, or retaliation has occurred for using the grievance system.
B. Nongrievable Matters
1. Requests for retroactive promotion or retroactive adjustment of a promotion date when the
conditions required for such retroactive action by applicable decisions of the U.S. Office of
Personnel Management, Office of Merit Systems Oversight and Effectiveness, are not met.
2. A dispute over a matter for which an employee has an entitlement to file an appeal,
grievance, or formal challenge in some other forum. This includes matters that are
reviewable by the U.S. Merit Systems Protection Board, the Equal Employment Opportunity
commission, the Office of Personnel Management, the Comptroller General, and the Federal
Labor Relations Authority.
3. A performance progress review, documentation of performance, the methods used to
appraise performance during the appraisal period (including the methods used to conduct and
document a performance progress review), as well as any tentative or preliminary appraisal.
4. Complaints about the content of published Department policy when the complaint is a
disagreement with the policy rather than a complaint that a policy has been misinterpreted
misapplied. "Department" policy means a policy or regulation issued at either the
Department level or the Operating Division level. “Published" policy means a policy issued
for distribution in writing by a legitimate authority and does not include unwritten practices
or customs.
5. Complaints about failure to receive a noncompetitive promotion or nonselection for
competitive promotion from a group of properly ranked and certified candidates under the
merit promotion program. However, when the complaint alleges impropriety in the
competitive rating, ranking, certification, or selection process, the complaint is covered (i.e.,
is not excluded).
6. Failure to receive a cash, time off, or honorary award.
7. Matters of concern or dissatisfaction on the part of Officers of the Commissioned Corps of
the U.S. Public Health Service
8. Matters involving allegations of discrimination, when a discrimination complaint has been
filed concerning the same matter or matters. This does not preclude an employee from filing
a grievance and seeking precomplaint equal employment opportunity counselling at the same
time. However, at such time that a discrimination complaint is filed, the grievance will be
cancelled and the matter will be reviewed under applicable discrimination complaint
procedures.
9. Senior Executive Service (SES) performance-based actions such as performance evaluations
or the return of an SES career appointee to the General Schedule or another pay system
during the 1-year probationary period.
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 4
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
10. A decision to grant or deny an SES pay rate increase.
11. The Establishment of a Performance Improvement Plan following an unacceptable rating.
12. An action which terminates a temporary or term promotion and which returns the employee
to the position from which the employee was temporarily promoted or to a similar position at
the same grade where the employee was informed in advance that the promotion is only
temporary.
13. Failure to grant a recruitment, retention, or relocation bonus.
14. Separation or termination of an employee for unsatisfactory performance or misconduct
during a probationary or trial period.
15. The return of an employee from an initial appointment as a supervisor or manager to a nonsupervisory or non-managerial position for failure to complete the supervisor or managerial
probationary period satisfactorily.
16. Separation of employees serving under Schedule A, B, or C appointments (excepted service
appointments).
