771-1-90 REPORTING AND ACCOUNTABILITY
A. OPDIVs and STAFFDIVs are responsible for:
1. Establishing a grievance file at the time the first decision is issued.
2. Ensuring that copies of all relevant materials are added to the file as the processing of the
grievance continues.
3. Ensuring that the employee has the right to submit relevant materials for inclusion in the
official grievance file at both stages of the grievance process.
B. Operating Human Resources Organizations are responsible for:
1. Ensuring compliance with all provisions of this instruction in the processing of
administrative grievances.
2. Retaining the final grievance case file after the Stage Two decision has been rendered or the
grievance has otherwise been closed.
3. Preparing any necessary reports regarding the administrative grievance system.
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 12
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
Exhibit A: SAMPLE GRIEVANCE FORMAT
DATE:
FROM:
SUBJECT:
To: Address a Stage One grievance to the first official within the organization with
authority over the matter at issue. If you do not know who that official is, ask
your immediate supervisor or consult with your Human Resources Office.
1. This is a Stage grievance under the (Insert Agency) Administrative
Grievance System.
2. The matter(s) that aggrieve(s) me occurred on [give date(s)] and is/are
described in detail as follows: [Furnish sufficient detail to clearly identify the
matter at issue. Fully explain the basis for your grievance and provide all
available evidence, documentation, and rationale to support your grievance
and the relief that you seek.]
3. The personal relief I seek is: [Specify clearly. If it is already stated or implied
above, restate it here]. [NOTE: "Personal relief" means a specific remedy
directly benefiting you and not an action concerning or against someone else.]
[Signature]
[Attachments: (It is preferable to identify any attachments.)]
[NOTE: It is preferable to make personal delivery when practicable. When mailing is used,
the postmark usually determines the date of filing of the grievance.
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 13
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
Exhibit B: SAMPLE DECISION FORMAT
FROM:
SUBJECT: Your Stage Grievance [indicate stage 1 or 2]
TO:
1. I received your Stage grievance on [date].
2. My decision is: [State the decision and include a summary of findings and
the reasons for the decision.]
3. NOTES:
a. If you have no authority over the matter(s) at issue, state that you have
forwarded the grievance to the appropriate official (give name and
address).
b. If the decision is to reject or cancel the grievance, state specifically the
reasons why.
c. If the decision is to grant the personal relief sought, be specific in
describing it to avoid future disputes as to its meaning or
implementation.
d. If the decision is to not grant the personal relief sought, include a
summary of findings and reasons for your decision on the matter(s) at
issue.
e. If this is a Stage One decision, state how the employee may pursue the
matter(s) at the next level.
[Signature]
[Attachments: (it is preferable to identify any attachments.)] 