C. HHS Employees are responsible for:
1. Following the provisions of this instruction when constructively presenting grievances for
consideration (a sample format for a proper grievance submission is enclosed as Exhibit A)
2. Adhering to the time limits specified in this instruction at each stage of the grievance
process.
3. Designating a representative in writing when a third party representative is desired.
4. Cooperating in the grievance process and providing any possible information or testimony
that will aid in resolving employee grievances.
771-1-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Use of Official Time: Employees will be authorized a reasonable amount of work time to
present a grievance and to prepare that portion of the grievance which the employee
could not normally be expected to prepare outside of his or her regular work hours.
B. Rejection of Grievance: A grievance may be rejected, either in whole or in part, as
appropriate, at any stage by a grievance official (i.e., by the Stage One or Stage Two
Official depending upon the stage at which the grievance is being reviewed) when the
grievance:
1. Does not specifically state that it is a grievance presentation in the manner required at Stage
One or Stage Two herein.
2. Does not furnish sufficient detail to identify clearly the matter of concern or dissatisfaction at
issue.
3. Does not specify the personal relief sought.
4. Consists of a matter or matters that are excluded by this instruction or are not subject to the
control of Department management.
5. Is made by an employee or nonemployee who is not covered by this instruction.
6. Is not timely.
C. Disallowance of Representative: A grievance official may disallow an employee’s
choice of representative when that representative is an HHS employee and is either a
subordinate of the grievant or is in the grievant’s supervisory chain, or when serving as a
representative in the grievance would constitute a conflict of interest based on the
individual’s official position with HHS.
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 7
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
D. Travel, Per Diem, and Contractual Costs: The employing organization of the employee
must pay (either directly or by reimbursement) any travel, per diem, and contractual or
procurement costs of factfinders and employees required by proper authority for
grievance proceedings. However, travel and per diem payments will not be authorized
for an employee's representative who is not an employee of HHS.
E. Cancellation of Grievance: A grievance may be cancelled, either in whole or in part, as
appropriate; by the employee upon written notification to the appropriate grievance
official (the written notification must be made a part of the grievance file). Also, a
grievance may be cancelled by the appropriate grievance official (i.e., depending upon
the stage at which the grievance is being reviewed):
1. At the employee's request.
2. Upon termination of the employee's employment with the Department, unless the personal
relief sought by the employee can be granted after termination of employment with the
Department
3. Upon the death of the employee, unless the grievance involves a question of pay or Benefits
that could be granted to a designated beneficiary or the employee’s estate.
4. For failure of the employee to furnish required information.
5. For failure of the employee to duly proceed with advancement of the grievance.
6. A cancellation decision will be made in writing, will provide an explanation of why the
cancellation was made in accordance with applicable portions of this instruction, and will
become part of the grievance file.
771-1-70 INFORMAL RESOLUTION
Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions are granted the authority to establish an Alternate
Dispute Resolution process as mentioned in section 771-1-50 of this instruction. It is
encouraged that employees and supervisors first seek the use of an Alternative Dispute
Resolution process.
This process is available to help resolve disputes quickly at the earliest possible stage. The ADR
is a voluntary program that uses mediation to provide an opportunity to be heard and to facilitate
resolution of a dispute in a manner satisfactory to all involved. Any employee, supervisor, or
manager can request mediation if they face an issue or concern that needs to be resolved.
Participation in ADR is voluntary and confidential. This process should be mutually agreed
upon prior to its use.
771-1-80 PROCEDURES
The HHS administrative grievance procedures consist of an informal procedure (Stage One) and
a formal procedure (Stage Two) that include fact-finding when appropriate. Exhibits A. and B.
contain sample formats that can be used in presenting a grievance or issuing a grievance
decision.
