B. Formal Procedure (Stage Two)
1. Presentation of a formal grievance: Within 15 calendar days after receipt of the Stage One
decision or the expiration of the Stage One time limits (or within 15 calendar days after the
effective date of a final decision of a suspension, separation, or reassignment, all of which
begin at the formal stage, the grievant must present his or her grievance to the Stage Two
Official in the same manner as in the Stage One process and provide a copy of the written
grievance to his or her immediate supervisor, when the grievance begins at the formal stage.
The employee must specifically state in the written grievance presentation that he or she is
making a formal (Stage Two) grievance presentation. There is no entitlement to an oral
grievance presentation, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the Stage Two Official
and at the grievant request. Oral grievance presentations must be followed up in writing and
comply with the prescribed time frames. The presentation must furnish sufficient detail to
identify clearly the matter at issue, explain the basis for the grievance, specify the personal
relief requested by the grievant, and should contain all available evidence, documentation,
and argument to support the grievance and to justify the personal relief requested. The
presentation must include a copy of the Stage One grievance presentation (if applicable) and
a copy of the Stage One decision (or state that one was not issued) and should clearly state
the reasons for disagreeing with the Stage One decision, if one was issued.
2. Resolution by Written Agreement: At any time during the formal procedure, the grievance
may be resolved either by a written decision that grants in its entirety the personal relief
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 10
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
requested by the grievant, or by a written agreement that is signed by the employee and the
Stage Two Official and made part of the record..
3. Decision Without Factfinding: When there are no substantive facts in dispute, the Stage Two
Official may, at his or her option, proceed to a decision based on the record at hand. A
decision without factfinding shall (after consultation with the Operating Human Resources
Organization): be in writing; state that, because there are no substantive facts in dispute,
factfinding has not been requested; and include a summary of findings and the reason(s) for
the decision.
4. Request for Factfinding: When the Stage Two Official is unable to reach a decision based on
the record at hand; he or she has the option of requesting factfinding and designating an
employee to serve as Factfinder. The Factfinder may be any HHS employee who was not
involved in the matter at issue in the grievance and who is at an appropriate grade level.
Normally, the Factfinder will be another employee who is part of the Stage Two Official’s
organization who is impartial and who is at the same grade level as the Stage One Official or
higher. The Factfinder must not occupy a position subordinate to any official who
recommended, advised, influenced, or made a decision on, or otherwise is or was involved or
has a personal interest in, the matter at issue in the grievance. The designation of an
individual as grievance Factfinder will be made in writing and a copy will be furnished to the
grievant at the time of the designation.
5. Fact-finding Inquiry: The Stage Two Official or his or her designee shall be responsible for
making available space and any other administrative services required that the Factfinder
may need to conduct an appropriate inquiry. At the discretion of the Factfinder, the inquiry
may consist of a documentary review, personal interviews, a group meeting, or any
combination thereof. Factfinders are authorized to take written, signed statements from
individuals who have information pertinent to the grievance. Because the grievance
procedure is purely an administrative process without any further third party review, such
statements need not be sworn or notarized. A simple signature of the individual making the
statement will suffice. The Factfinder will keep the grievance file intact as received from the
Stage Two Official. The Factfinder will only add to the file, not delete from it or rearrange
it. When the Factfinder has completed the inquiry, he or she shall make all documents in the
grievance file available to both the grievant and the Stage One Official (or the Deciding
Official for non-appealable adverse actions and other actions that begin at Stage Two) for
review and written comment, unless they waive opportunity for review and comment.
6. Report of Findings and Recommendations: The Factfinder will normally issue the report to
the Stage Two Official as soon as possible but no later than 60 calendar days after the receipt
of the grievance for factfinding. The report is advisory and any recommendations made are
not binding on the Stage Two Official. The Factfinder shall provide the grievant with a copy
of the report at the same time it is provided to the Stage Two Official.
7. Decision After Examiner's Report: The Stage Two Official shall (after coordination with the
Operating Human Resources Office) issue a written decision to the grievant as soon as
possible, but no later than 30 calendar days after receipt of the Factfinder’s report and the
final grievance file. The decision must include a report of findings and the reasons for the
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 11
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
decision. The Stage Two grievance decision is the final decision of the Department of
Health and Human Services in the grievance. There is no right to request reconsideration of
a grievance decision or to appeal to a third party.
