HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 8
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
A. Informal Procedure (Stage One)
1. At any time during the informal procedure, the grievance may be resolved either by a written
decision that grants in its entirety the personal relief requested by the grievant or by a written
agreement that is signed by the grievant and the grievance official and made part of the
record.
2. The informal procedure applies to all grievances, except that grievances about nonappealable adverse actions, non-appealable separations, and reassignments all begin at the
formal procedure (Stage Two).
3. Presentation of an informal grievance: The grievant must present the grievance in writing to
the Stage One Official and provide a copy of the written grievance to his or her immediate
supervisor (when the Stage One Official is not the employee's immediate supervisor). There
is no entitlement to an oral grievance presentation, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by
the Stage One Official and at the grievant request. Oral grievance presentations must be
followed up in writing and comply with the prescribed time frame below.
4. The Stage One Official is the first official within the Department who has authority over the
matter at issue. This is usually the official who made the decision or committed the act or
omission about which the employee is dissatisfied. However:
5. A human resources official (as distinguished from a selecting official) will serve as the Stage
One Official for a grievance about rating or ranking under competitive procedures. A human
resources official is also the Stage One Official for any grievance about a decision made in
the Operating Human Resources Organization, e.g., a qualifications determination, rejection
of an application for a position vacancy, or a discretionary pay setting determination.
6. For grievances concerning performance ratings, the official who gave final approval to the
summary rating is the Stage One Official. When this official is not the rating official, he or
she may elect to consult with the rating official. Depending on the circumstances of each
summary rating, this official could be the rating official, the reviewing official, or the official
with responsibility for an applicable performance awards budget, if he or she had
discretionary approval authority over final performance ratings.
7. To distinguish mere inquiries or correspondence from grievances, the grievant must
specifically state in the written grievance that he or she is making a Stage One grievance
submission under this instruction. The written grievance must also furnish sufficient detail to
identify clearly the matter at issue, explain the basis for the grievance, and specify the
personal relief (i.e., a specific remedy directly benefiting the grievant) requested. Failure to
state personal relief that is viable will be grounds for rejecting the grievance. The grievance
should contain all available evidence, documentation, and argument to support the grievance
and to justify the personal relief requested.
8. Time Limits: The Stage One presentation must be submitted within 30 calendar days after
the act or occurrence (or the date the employee became aware of the act or occurrence) that
HUMAN RESOURCES MANUAL 9
Instruction 771-1: Administrative Grievance Procedure
Issuance Date: 06/05/2008
caused the employee to be aggrieved. Any of the requirements regarding either the content
or the time limit for a Stage One submission may be waived at the discretion of the Stage
One Official for good cause.
9. Decision: As soon as possible, but no later than 15 calendar days after receipt of the written
grievance, the Stage One Official must inform the employee in writing of the decision and
the reasons therefore. This time limit may be extended for good cause, provided the
grievance official advises the grievant that the decision will be delayed and the expected date
of the decision. Examples of good cause for this purpose include:
a. the grievance official is on leave or travel and will be unavailable, or
b. there are pressing mission requirements which will preclude the grievance official
from providing attention to the grievance. Stage One grievance decisions must be
made no later than 30 calendar days from the submission of the grievance when
the time limit has been extended for good cause. When the grievance has not
been resolved, the decision must state whom the employee must contact to pursue
the formal (Stage Two) grievance process and that the time limit for doing so is
15 calendar days after receipt of the Stage One decision.
10. Failure to Issue Timely Decision: If the Stage One Official fails to issue a decision within
the applicable time limits, the grievant may, at his or her option, proceed directly to Stage
Two within 15 calendar days of the expiration of the time limit.
