990-003: Nursing Mothers Program
Effective Date: 6/21/2019

Document Change History
Version Number

Release Date

Summary of Changes

Section/Page

Changes Made By

1

6/21/2019

Release

N/A

Office of Human Resources
Policy & Accountability Division on behalf of Office of Assistant Secretary for Health
employmentpolicy@hhs.gov

Concur:
/s/

J. Blair Duncan
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources
6/17/2019

Approved:
/s/

Scott W. Rowell
Assistant Secretary for Administration
6/18/2019

A. Purpose
This guidance is provided to establish procedures and clarify legal requirements for the Nursing Mothers Program within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Service (HHS).

B. Coverage
This guidance covers all HHS Operating and Staff Divisions (OpDivs/StaffDivs) and must be carried out in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

C. References
29 United States Code (U.S.C.), Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), Section 207(r)(1) (new) 
Public Law 111-148, Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, Section 4207, Breaks for Nursing Mothers - PDF
Office of Personnel Management (OPM): Guide for Establishing a Federal Nursing Mother’s Program, January 2013 - PDF
OPM Memo, Nursing Mothers in Federal Employment, December 22, 2010
HHS, U.S. Public Health Service, Office of the Surgeon General, The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Support Breastfeeding, 2011
U.S. Department of Labor’s Wage and Hour Division, Changes to the FLSA: Break time for Nursing Mothers Provision
D. Responsibilities
HHS, Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (OHR):
Develops Department-wide human resources guidance and policy consistent with HHS and Office of Personnel Management (OPM) policy, procedures and all applicable Federal laws and regulations; and
Periodically confirms Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions are adhering to HHS and OPM policy and guidance as well as all applicable Federal laws and regulations with regard to nursing mothers.
Operating Divisions and Staff Divisions:
Comply with this guidance, HHS and OPM policy, procedures and guidance, and all applicable Federal laws and regulations; and
Ensure that a private space is available and employees, who are nursing mothers, are given reasonable breaks to express milk.
E. General
HHS has been in the forefront of breastfeeding promotion and support for several decades.  HHS presents targets through Healthy People 2020 goals for breastfeeding:  81.9% of women initiating breastfeeding, 60% of babies being breastfed for at least 6 months, and 34% for a full year.  HHS also supports nursing mothers who want to express milk upon their return to the workplace after the birth of their infant.

According to the Department of Labor, mothers are among the fastest-growing segment of the U.S. labor force.  Recent data indicate that at least 62% of all mothers with children younger than 12 months are employed.  Approximately 70% of employed mothers with children younger than 3 years of age work full-time.  After pregnancy, one-third of these mothers return to work within 3 months, and two-thirds return within 6 months.

Research indicates that intentions to return to work full-time after giving birth are significantly associated with lower rates of breastfeeding initiation and shorter duration.  Some mothers will make the determination not to initiate breastfeeding in anticipation of returning to work.  Given the substantial presence of mothers in our Federal work force, HHS has served as a role model in establishing and assuring lactation support, through documents such as The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Support Breastfeeding, which includes several action items directed toward employment.  OPM’s Guide for Establishing a Federal Nursing Mother’s Program, lists names of organizations who can provide information on breastfeeding, including the HHS, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health (OASH), Office of Women’s Health.

