
990-1-60  Responsibilities
HHS Assistant Secretary for Administration, Office of Human Resources (ASA/OHR):
Develops Department-wide human resources Instruction and guidance consistent with HHS and the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) policies, procedures, and all applicable Federal laws and regulations.
Designates a WFO to implement and oversee the Department's WFP and to incorporate workplace flexibilities into everyday business operations.
Periodically reviews and reports Operating Division and Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv) workplace flexibility data to ensure conformance with HHS and OPM policies and guidance, and all applicable Federal laws and regulations.
Workplace Flexibilities Officer (WFO):  The WFO is responsible for overarching management and administration of the Department's WFP including, but not limited to:
Develops workplace flexibilities guidance and implement WFP Department-wide.
Manages compliance and accountability for WFP training requirements for all employees.
Leads the development of goals and metrics to evaluate Program effectiveness and data collection related to reporting requirements.
Periodically reviews OpDiv/StaffDiv program implementation procedures, actions, qualification standards, and reports to ensure conformance with HHS and OPM policies and guidance and all applicable Federal laws and regulations.
Serves as the primary HHS point of contact with OPM on workplace flexibilities.
Serves as a resource for managers and employees with regards to workplace flexibilities.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads:
Ensures Division compliance with this Instruction and applicable Federal laws and regulations related to workplace flexibilities.
Ensures the fair and equitable implementation and use of workplace flexibilities across the respective Division.
Ensures Division collaboration with WFO to address OpDiv/StaffDiv-specific needs.
Designates a WFPM for the Division or delegate authority to designate the WFPM as appropriate.
Human Resource Centers (HR Centers) Directors:
Complies with this Instruction and applicable Federal laws and regulations related to workplace flexibilities.
Ensures the employee's locality pay and benefits align with the employee's official worksite in accordance with 5 CFR 531.605.
Ensures changes to the official worksite (personnel action requests) are processed in a timely manner, generally within one pay period of receipt of the request.
Ensures compliance with and implementation of Workers' Compensation benefits and processes.
Ensures appropriate collective bargaining obligations are applied and satisfied.
OpDiv/StaffDiv Workplace Flexibilities Program Managers (WFPM):
Complies with this Instruction and applicable Federal laws and regulations related to workplace flexibilities.
Develops OpDiv/StaffDiv workplace flexibilities guidance in accordance with this Instruction and ensure proper implementation at OpDiv/StaffDiv.
Manages compliance and accountability for WFP training requirements for OpDiv/StaffDiv employees.
Establishes procedures, in coordination with HR Center, to ensure OpDiv/StaffDiv employee's locality pay and benefits align with the employee's official worksite, and is appropriately represented on their WFA.  
Coordinates, as necessary, with the HR Center, hiring manager and the WFO to ensure proper implementation and oversight of the OpDiv/StaffDiv WFP.
Provides information and data to the WFO when requested. 
Serves as the OpDiv/StaffDiv primary subject matter expert for the WFP and point of contact for addressing employee and supervisor inquiries.
Ensures employee WFAs remain current and accurate.
Supervisors:
Complies with, apply and enforce this Instruction and applicable Federal laws and regulations related to workplace flexibilities.
Ensures the fair and equitable implementation and use of workplace flexibilities across subordinate staff.
Ensures employee position description and assigned duties accurately reflect the employee's duties and responsibilities, and position eligibility is in alignment with the PD and assigned duties.
Reviews employees' requests for a WFA and approve, disapprove, or modify the request in accordance with this Instruction, any applicable OpDiv/StaffDiv guidance, and collective bargaining agreement requirements.  Ensure employees renew their agreement annually.
Complies with OpDiv/StaffDiv procedure for timely notification to the HR Center for any change to an employee's official worksite, generally within one pay period of the change.
Annually, completes the assigned mandatory workplace flexibilities training as required.
Ensures employees complete annual mandatory workplace flexibilities training.
Ensures compliance with current travel policies and guidance as they pertain to the approved workplace flexibility, this Instruction, and the employee's official worksite.
Ensures employee's transit subsidy application aligns with the employee's WFA.
Ensures employees in telework and remote work status receive the same benefits and opportunities (e.g., work assignments, awards and recognition, development opportunities, etc.) as employees who do not participate in a WFP.