
F. Requirements
All working mothers who are civilian employees in the executive branch are entitled to breaks during the work day to express milk in a private space, in accordance with law and OPM guidance.
The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) requires employers to provide ‘a reasonable break time for an employee to express milk for her nursing child for 1 year after the child’s birth each time such employee has need to express the milk;’ and ‘a place, other than a bathroom, that is shielded from view and free from intrusion from co-workers and the public, which may be used by an employee to express breast milk’ (29 U.S.C. § 207(r)(1)).  The Department of Labor refers to this as the Break Time for Nursing Mothers Provision (see References).
OpDivs/StaffDivs must assess their workforce and environment to determine the following:  the number of nursing mothers likely to use the facilities; space needed; resource needs (facilities, maintenance, supplies, etc.), and what, if any, recordkeeping will be necessary.  (Note:  OpDiv/StaffDivs are not obligated to provide space, if they don’t have an employee who needs to express milk; therefore HHS divisions will need to regularly monitor their workforce needs to ensure compliance with the law.)  Information about the lactation accommodations should be widely disseminated within each OpDiv/StaffDiv.  Each OpDiv/StaffDiv should assign the appropriate personnel to oversee operations required for the lactation room(s) and serve as the primary point of contact.
G. Procedures
Private Space.  In accordance with the law, OpDivs/StaffDivs must provide their employees who are nursing mothers with a space that is private - not a bathroom - and free from intrusion by co-workers and the public.  A space temporarily created or converted into a space for expressing milk or made available when needed by the nursing mother is sufficient, provided that the space is shielded from view and free from any intrusion by co-workers and the public.  If the space is not specifically dedicated for the nursing mother's use, it must be available when needed in order to meet legal requirements and OPM guidance.

It is incumbent upon HHS, as the lead Federal agency responsible for enhancing and protecting the health and well-being of all Americans, to ensure that each nursing mother's privacy is respected when determining the location of private spaces.
‘Aroom for nursing mothers is private space a nursing mother can use to express milk.  This space must be shielded from view and free from intrusion of others.  A nursing mother's room must be functional, with a private space with a place to sit and a flat surface, other than the floor, to place the breast pump and other supplies.  Although there are no size or permanency requirements, these rooms should provide access to electricity for the use of a breast pump, as well as good lighting, a comfortable temperature, and proper ventilation.  Further, a room for nursing mothers should be clean and agencies should provide cleaning wipes and paper towels’ (OPM’s Guide for Establishing a Federal Nursing Mother’s Program, page 3).

Lactation rooms should not be located in, or accessed through, bathrooms, locker rooms or similar facilities, but should be distinct spaces designed for their intended purpose.  Although a sink with hot and cold running water is not a requirement for a lactation room, a sink should be located in as close proximity as possible for handwashing and the washing/rinsing of pump attachments.  OpDivs/StaffDivs may determine the most appropriate means by which to provide private space for a nursing mother.  The following suggestions are provided for consideration:

Dedicated space – A permanent space dedicated as a milk expression room has been found to be an efficient option for many OpDivs/StaffDivs.  It eliminates the need to regularly assess workforce needs to ensure compliance with the law.  Room dimensions for a permanent space designated as a lactation room can vary.  However, a larger size room assures that handicapped users will be appropriately accommodated.
Multi-User space - Multi-user milk expression rooms serve as dedicated space, but are efficient by allowing more than one nursing mother to express milk at the same time.  Multi-user spaces can accommodate two or more nursing mothers, depending upon the need.  Privacy for individual users must be assured.  Privacy can be obtained by use of cubicle partitions or “stations” that include a privacy door with locks or may be obtained by use of a divider or privacy curtain.  The dividers must ensure that each station is completely private.
Flexible space - A variety of flexible spaces may be utilized, such as available offices, conference rooms, rest or break rooms, and other spaces.  Nursing mothers and their supervisors should work together to arrange scheduling for use of flexible spaces.  In the absence of a permanent dedicated milk expression room, a plan denoting clear communication will help nursing mothers know how they will be accommodated.  In addition, the space must be available whenever the nursing mother has the need to pump.
Pumping within a private office - If a nursing mother determines she would like to pump within her private office, any areas that allow visibility into the office should be covered while pumping.  When she is pumping in her private office, the nursing mother should ensure that there is a sign on the door of her office that indicates the need for privacy and indicates that people should not enter her office at that time.
Mobile space – When traditional permanent or flexible milk expression "rooms" are not available for nursing mothers who may be stationed primarily in outdoor settings, other options, such as pop-up tents, mobile options, or space in nearby buildings may provide a solution for flexible, portable options.  Other needs such as access to water should also be considered.
Basic lactation rooms may be created or re-purposed out of little used areas within existing building space.

OPM’s Guide for Establishing a Federal Nursing Mother’s Program (pages 9-14) covers the requirements for lactation rooms, as well as best practices found at other federal agencies, and ideas for creating ideal private spaces for working mothers.
Reasonable Break Time.  OpDivs/StaffDivs must provide a reasonable amount of break time to express milk as frequently as needed by the nursing mother for up to one year from her infant’s birth, as long as the mother continues to express milk, in accordance with OPM guidance.  Many mothers typically need to express their milk every 2 to 3 hours (OPM Guide for Establishing a Federal Nursing Mothers Program, page 8).  The frequency of breaks as well as the duration of each break will likely vary depending on the individual mother's needs.  Supervisors are required to use their best judgment based on discussions with their employee(s) to determine what is considered reasonable.  Supervisors may extend the time (beyond 1 year of the infant’s birth) based on discussions with the nursing mother and applicable collective bargaining agreements.