Instruction 990-1, Workplace Flexibilities
Effective Date: 02/09/2022
Revised: 03/22/2022

Material Transmitted:
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Instruction 990-1, Workplace Flexibilities, dated February 9, 2022.

Material Superseded:
For non-Bargaining Unit Employees:  HHS Instruction 990-1.2, Telework, September 18, 2011

Background:
This Instruction establishes HHS' policy on the various workplace flexibilities available to employees in the performance of their duties consistent with applicable law, regulation, and guidance from the Office of Personnel Management (OPM).  In March 2022, the Workplace Flexibilities Agreement was finalized.

This policy is effective immediately and must be carried out by HHS Operating and Staff Division HR Centers in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, collective bargaining agreements, and Departmental policy.

/s/ W. Robert Leavitt
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources Chief Human Capital Officer

990-1-00  Sections
990-1-10       Purpose
990-1-20       Coverage and Exclusions
990-1-30       Delegation of Authority
990-1-40       References
990-1-50       Definitions
990-1-60       Responsibilities
990-1-70       Workplace Flexibilities
990-1-8

0       Determining Workplace Flexibilities Eligibility
990-1-90       Determining The Official Worksite
990-1-100     Work Related Injuries At The Alternative Worksite
990-1-110     Dependent Care
990-1-120     Leave, Early Dismissals, and Closures
990-1-130    Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP)
990-1-140    Workplace Flexibilities Approval, Denial, Suspension & Termination
990-1-150    Training Requirement
990-1-160    Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability

990-1-10  Purpose
This Instruction provides requirements and establishes standard guidelines and criteria to allow the use of broad workplace flexibilities across HHS.

When provisions of this Instruction differ from changes in applicable law or regulation, the changes in law or regulation apply.

990-1-20  Coverage and Exclusions
Coverage.
The provisions of this Instruction apply to all HHS employees - PDF, including employees under the Intergovernmental Personnel Act (IPA), and Federal employees on detail to the Department.
U.S. Public Health Service (USPHS) Commissioned Corps Officers who supervise Federal employees are required to execute the supervisory authorities outlined in this Instruction.
Exclusions.  This Instruction does not cover:
U.S. Public Health Service (USPHS) Commissioned Corps Officers
Directed reassignments or administratively determined changes in duty station
The provisions in this Instruction pertaining to conditions of employment for bargaining unit employees are fully negotiable in accordance with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 71, and any such actions may require notification to labor organizations when impacted employees are bargaining unit employees. When the provisions of this Instruction differ from the requirements of any applicable Collective Bargaining Agreements (CBA), the CBA takes precedence for bargaining unit employees.
990-1-30  Delegation of Authority
The authority to develop and implement the Department-wide Instruction for Workplace Flexibilities is delegated to the Deputy Assistant Secretary for Human Resources (DAS-HR).

The authority to approve, develop, and implement an Operating Division/Staff Division (OpDiv/StaffDiv) level workplace flexibility program in alignment with this Instruction is hereby delegated to the OpDiv/StaffDiv Heads.  The OpDiv/StaffDiv Head may delegate the authority to develop and implement Workplace Flexibilities Programs Managers to HR Directors or Executive Officers, as appropriate.


990-1-40  References
Public Law (P.L.) 106-346, Section 359, October 23, 2000 - PDF
P.L. 111-292, H.R. 1722, Telework Enhancement Act of 2010 - PDF
5 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 351.203, Definitions
5 CFR § 531.605 - PDF, Determining an employee's official worksite
5 CFR § 550.112(j) - PDF, Official Duty Station
5 CFR § 551.422(d) - PDF, Time Spent Traveling
OPM Guide to Telework and Remote Work in the Federal Government: Leveraging Telework and Remote Work in the Federal Government to Better Meet Our Human Capital Needs and Improve Mission Delivery, dated November 2021
Department of Labor Publication, CA-810, Injury Compensation for Federal Employees, Revised 2009 - PDF
HHS Office of Human Resources Instruction 610-1, Establishing and Administering Hours of Duty.
HHS Rules of Behavior for the Use of HHS Information and IT Resources Policy, HHS-OCIO-OIS-2019-05-004
HHS ASA Memorandum, Delegation of Human Resources Authorities, dated October 15, 2019
HHS Travel Policy Manual (Fiscal Year 2018 – Q4) - PDF
Department of State's Memorandum, Requirements for Executive Branch Employees Teleworking in Foreign Locations, June 6, 2016 (DETO)
