990-1-50  Definitions
Agency Worksite.  The official Federal agency location where work activities are based, generally considered a centralized location of an employee's assigned organization.  The term regular worksite is also used to describe agency worksite.
Alternative Worksite.  Generally considered an employee's approved telework site, or, for a remote worker the approved remote worksite (e.g., an employee's residence).
Domestic Employees Teleworking Overseas Agreement (DETO).  Approved special arrangements allowing an HHS employee working in a position within the United States to telework from a foreign location for an established period.  OpDivs/StaffDivs who establish such a telework arrangement with an employee must adhere to the requirements in the Department of State's Memorandum, Requirements for Executive Branch Employees Teleworking in Foreign Locations, June 6, 2016, and the international requirements in HHS' Travel Policy Manual.
Directed/Emergency Telework.  Scenarios where employees may be directed to work from a location other than the alternative worksite pursuant to an agency's Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP), or pursuant to OPM regulations at 5 CFR 550.401-408, or 5 CFR 550.409.  These orders are not under an agency telework program, and thus are not dependent upon an employee having entered a telework agreement.
Eligible Positions.  Positions comprised of job duties that can be effectively performed outside the agency worksite without diminishing individual or organizational performance.
Commuting Area.  The geographic area that usually constitutes one area for employment purposes. It includes any population center (or two or more neighboring ones) and the surrounding localities in which people live and can reasonably be expected to travel back and forth daily to the agency worksite.
Official Worksite.  The official worksite is generally the agency worksite for most employees, including a teleworker. For a remote worker, the official worksite is generally the alternative worksite to which the employee is assigned.  The official worksite is the location of an employee's duty station as documented at item 39 on an employee's Standard Form (SF) 50.
Situational/Ad Hoc Telework.  A workplace flexibility allowing an employee with an approved written Workplace Flexibilities Agreement (WFA) to request to telework as the need arises.  Unlike routine telework, situational/ad-hoc telework occurs sporadically on an irregular basis without a regular telework schedule.
Remote Work.  A workplace flexibility allowing an employee to work at an approved alternative worksite, within or outside the local commuting area of the agency worksite, with no expectation to report to the agency worksite on a regular and recurring basis.
Remote – Within the Local Commuting Area. A position designation used when there is some frequency for an onsite presence (e.g., expectation for in-person collaboration or other in-person work activities on an irregular basis, or duties require an irregular, but consistent, e.g., twice per month, presence at the agency worksite).  For these positions, employees should have an official worksite/alternative worksite  within the local commuting area. The term "official worksite/alternative worksite" will be used throughout this Instruction in referencing a remote worker’s worksite, since their official worksite is an alternative worksite as well. 
Remote – Outside the Local Commuting Area. A position designation used when there is little to no onsite presence (e.g., expectation is for in-person requirement once or twice annually).  For these positions, employees are not required to have an official worksite/alternative worksite within the local commuting area.
Routine Telework.  A workplace flexibility, in which an employee, under a written agreement, is scheduled to perform their work at an approved alternative worksite on a regular and recurring basis.
Telework.  Is codified at 5 U.S.C. 6501 and refers to a work flexibility arrangement under which an employee performs the duties and responsibilities of such employee's position, and other authorized activities, from an approved worksite other than the location from which the employee would otherwise work.
Telework Ready.  The capability for an employee to work from an alternative worksite as may be required to continue operations through the efficient and effective use of information technology and telecommunication. 
Workplace Flexibilities Agreement (WFA).  A written agreement between the employee and the agency that allows employees and supervisors to establish telework or remote work in accordance with this Instruction.
Workplace Flexibilities Officer (WFO).  HHS-level official charged with overseeing the Workplace Flexibilities Program across the Department.
Workplace Flexibilities Program Manager (WFPM).  OpDiv/StaffDiv program manager charged with overseeing the Workplace Flexibilities Program within their OpDiv/StaffDiv.
Workplace Flexibilities Program (WFP).  A program that promotes use of telework, and/or remote work to promote a work/life balance for employees.
