
990-1-80  Determining Workplace Flexibilities Eligibility
The purpose of the HHS WFP is to expand options for when and where an employee may perform work.  The Department's recruitment efforts are aided by offering various options for where and when employees may work. Workplace flexibilities help to retain existing talent and increase productivity through employee engagement. These flexibilities benefit the employee as well. Workplace flexibilities benefit the employee through the enhancement of work/life balance allowing employee satisfaction and well-being.  Though not all flexibilities are available to all employees, the Department encourages management to allow some degree of workplace flexibilities to as many employees as possible.

The ability to participate in the WFP is intended to facilitate, not impede, the successful accomplishment of work. As such, not all positions will be eligible to telework or be remote. Participation in the WFP is determined by assessing several key elements involving the position, organizational/business needs of the OpDiv/StaffDiv, and the employee's eligibility:

The Position:
The nature of work associated with the position can be performed by allowing some or all duties to be completed without visiting the official worksite. This may include work assignments that involve field work or physical presence in some other location (e.g., court, other federal work site) that is not the official worksite.
Must assess position eligibility against the business needs of the organization, ensuring that the level of participation does not diminish organizational performance including, but not limited to, the impact to whether telework or remote status would negatively impact the effective accomplishment of work for others.
The resources required for the employee to complete the work are available/accessible virtually including, but not limited to, a computer to connect to the virtual private network (VPN), the Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP)
The ability to evaluate the quantity, quality, manner of performance, and timeliness, as appropriate, for the work.
The number of hours required to perform work at the agency worksite determines whether the position is eligible for telework (routine or situational) or remote work (within or outside of the commuting area of the agency worksite), or onsite work.
Remote Work Eligible: When duties require less than 16 hours per bi-weekly pay period at the agency worksite.
Routine Telework Eligible:  When duties require 16 - 64 hours per bi-weekly pay period at the agency worksite.
Situational/Ad-hoc Telework Eligible:  No minimum number of hours per bi-weekly pay period, determined on a project, work assignment, mission need, or in response to an employee request.
Note a position that is designated remote, is eligible for routine or situational telework based on employee preference. Similarly, a position designated routine telework is eligible for situational telework based on employee preference.

The Employee:

Employee eligibility is determined based on the factors as outlined below. Individual eligibility may be revoked if the employee’s performance diminishes or if the employee’s behavior warrants official disciplinary action. A WFA for telework or remote work may be terminated by the employee at any time and the agency may terminate a WFA if it is deemed to be in the best interest of the agency to do so.
For incumbent employees to be eligible to participate, the employee must have a performance plan in place and be performing at least at the fully successful level and participation is not expected to diminish organizational performance.
Employees hired in positions that were advertised as remote have no additional eligibility requirements.
An employee is considered ineligible if:
The employee has been officially disciplined for being absent without leave for more than 5 days in any calendar year; or
An employee has been officially disciplined for violations of the Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch (5 CFR 2635, Subpart G) for viewing, downloading, or exchanging pornography, including child pornography on a Federal Government computer or while performing Federal Government duties; or
The employee’s performance during the performance year falls below the fully successful level.
990-1-90  Determining The Official Worksite
For employees covered by a WFA, the agency must determine the employee’s official worksite on a case-by case basis pursuant to the criteria under 5 CFR 531.605(d). This determination will be made by the HR Center. The official worksite must be documented on an employee's Notification of Personnel Action (Standard Form 50 or equivalent).
