
Teleworking Employees (Regular, Situational/Ad-hoc, Temporary full-time).
The official worksite is the location of the agency worksite for the employee’s position (the place where the employee normally reports for work on non-telework days), as long as the employee is scheduled to report physically at least twice each bi-weekly pay period on a regular and recurring basis to the agency worksite.
For an employee whose work location varies on a recurring basis, the employee need not work at least twice each bi-weekly pay period at the agency worksite (where the employee's work activities are based) as long as the employee is regularly performing work within the locality pay area for that worksite.
Remote Employees. The official worksite is the approved alternative worksite, typically the employee’s home address, as long as the employee is not scheduled to report at least twice each bi-weekly pay period on a regular and recurring basis.
990-1-100  Work Related Injuries At The Alternative Worksite
All HHS employees are covered under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA) for injuries or occupational illness while performing official duties.

Employees must immediately report any accident or injury occurring at the alternative worksite to the employee's supervisor.
The supervisor must respond immediately, and within 24 hours of being notified by the employee, report the injury or illness to the appropriate Human Resources Center as a possible workers' compensation incident.
990-1-110  Dependent Care
While telework is not a substitute for dependent care, it can be a very valuable flexibility to employees with caregiving responsibilities by eliminating time required to commute and expanding employees' choices as to dependent care.

Employees may not telework with the intent of or for the sole purpose of meeting their dependent care responsibilities while performing official duties.  While performing official duties, teleworkers and remote workers are expected to arrange for dependent care just as they would if they were working at an agency worksite; however, telework may be used as part of a more flexible work arrangement.
The flexibilities in the WFP may be leveraged to assist employees in managing and balancing dependent care responsibilities and job-related responsibilities.  However, employees should not be engaging in dependent care activities when performing official duties.
990-1-120  Leave, Early Dismissals, and Closures
Employees with a WFA are required to telework on days that they are regularly scheduled to report to the agency worksite when the Federal Government has announced unscheduled leave, unscheduled telework, delayed arrival, early departures, or that Federal offices are closed to the public.
Employees with a WFA are also required to follow established leave procedures to account for time the employee is not performing work during a scheduled tour of duty.
Weather and Safety Leave
Employees with a WFA who are scheduled to report to the agency worksite will be required to work in the event of a weather and safety emergency in accordance with their agreement and if able to safely perform work, or to request leave to account for hours work is not performed during a scheduled tour of duty.
Employees with a WFA who may be onsite at the agency worksite during a weather and safety emergency may be required to resume working upon arrival to their alternative worksite and complete their tour of duty or to request leave to account for hours work is not performed during a scheduled tour of duty.
Weather and safety leave is permitted for employees with a WFA if the employee is unable to safely perform work at the alternate worksite (e.g., power outage due to a storm, flooding, local security concerns, or other related emergencies).
990-1-130  Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP)
As part of an OpDiv/StaffDiv Continuity of Operations Plan (COOP), telework and remote work must be incorporated into the COOP.
Employees designated as mission critical may be required to report to the agency worksite in the event of the activation of a COOP.
990-1-140  Workplace Flexibilities Approval, Denial, Suspension & Termination
Participation in the HHS WFP is voluntary and extended to provide the flexibility required of a changing workforce.  WFA may be terminated by the supervisor or the employee at any time.  Reasons for termination may include circumstances wherein the arrangement is no longer conducive to the business needs of the organization, the employee's performance diminishes, or the employee's circumstances change and they request an adjustment.

An employee must request and obtain approval from their supervisor, consistent with Section 990-1-60, to participate in the Workplace Flexibilities Program.
An employee's request for workplace flexibilities may be approved as submitted, modified, or denied by the supervisor.
If a request is denied or modified, the supervisor must provide the employee a written notice detailing the reason(s) for the decision within five workdays of the disapproval or modification.
A WFA must be terminated by the supervisor under these circumstances:
If the employee has been officially disciplined for being absent without leave for more than five (5) workdays in any calendar year.  The term “official discipline” refers to a disciplinary action that results in the placement of a document in an employee's official personnel file (OPF).
If the employee has been officially disciplined for violations of the Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch (5 CFR 2365, Subpart G) for viewing, downloading, or exchanging pornography, including child pornography, on a Federal Government computer or while performing official Federal Government duties.
If telework continues to diminish employee or agency performance, even after attempts to mitigate such diminishment have been attempted;
The employee does not comply with the terms of the WFA agreement.
If a WFA is being terminated, the employee will receive a reasonable amount of time to make arrangements to report to the agency worksite on a daily basis. In general, this is at a minimum a full bi-weekly pay-period for telework and remote – within the local commuting area employees, and two full bi-weekly pay periods for employees designated remote - outside the local commuting area.
Suspension of Telework or Remote Work. The agency mission may require a suspension of telework or remote work for a period of time to meet the urgent or emergency situation. Examples may include, but are not limited to, a national emergency, a mission critical-related emergency, a new mission or program establishment.
In these unusual situations, the agency will provide written notice and will endeavor to provide the impacted employee(s) with as much advance notice as possible.
Remote WFA Termination
If the WFA for remote work is terminated by the supervisor because the arrangement no longer meets the business needs of the organization, and the supervisor reassigns the employee to the agency worksite or other official worksite, the employee is entitled to relocation reimbursement.
If a WFA for remote work is terminated for cause such as, diminished performance or conduct violations, and the supervisor elects to reassign the employee to the agency worksite, the employee is not entitled to relocation reimbursement.
990-1-150  Training Requirement
All HHS employees are required to complete annual Workplace Flexibilities Training to participate in the WFP and to ensure the readiness of the HHS workforce in the event of an emergency or continuing operations environment.
