
The FLSA does not require mothers to be compensated for breaks taken for the purpose of expressing milk.  However, in accordance with OPM guidance, when the OpDiv/StaffDiv already provides compensated breaks (e.g., 15 minutes in morning and 15 minutes in the afternoon) that employees can use for any purpose, an employee who uses that break time to express milk must be compensated in the same way that other employees are compensated for such break time.  A nursing mother may also work out a schedule with her supervisor that will allow her to come into the office earlier or leave later than the regular scheduled workday to accommodate nursing breaks. 
Workforce Flexibilities.  OpDiv/StaffDivs are encouraged to utilize current HHS workforce flexibilities to accommodate working mothers who are nursing.  Divisions should review their internal practices, procedures, and collective bargaining agreements before making determinations.  Examples:
Alternative Work Schedules (AWS) - Flexible or compressed work schedules may be established for a nursing mother who needs time off to express milk during normal working hours, consistent with 5 U.S.C. Chapter 61, Subchapter II, and 5 CFR, Part 610, Subpart D.  Consult OPM’s Handbook on Alternative Work Schedules, and Labor-Management Relations Guidance Bulletin: Negotiating Flexible and Compressed Work Schedules, both on OPM.gov, for additional guidance.
Leave and Other Paid Time Off - An employee may be allowed to use annual leave, leave without pay, compensatory time off, or credit hours.
Annual Leave - OpDivs/StaffDivs should be as accommodating as possible in reviewing and approving employee requests for annual leave to express milk, consistent with 5 CFR Part 630, Subpart C, and applicable collective bargaining agreements.
Leave Without Pay - At the discretion of the OpDiv/StaffDiv, leave without pay (LWOP) may be granted to an employee who requests breaks to express milk during normal working hours. Consistent with OPM guidance, OpDivs/StaffDivs are encouraged, whenever possible, to act favorably upon requests by employees for LWOP to express milk.
Compensatory Time Off – OpDivs/StaffDivs may approve requests to use compensatory time off that an employee has earned in exchange for performing an equal amount of time in irregular or occasional overtime work. For employees under flexible work schedules, OpDivs/StaffDivs may approve employee requests to earn compensatory time off for both regularly scheduled and irregular or occasional overtime work, as appropriate.
Credit Hours - Credit hours are hours within a flexible work schedule that an employee elects to work in excess of his or her basic work requirement (e.g., 80 hours in a pay period for a full-time employee) so as to vary the length of a workweek or workday. A nursing mother may be allowed, with supervisory approval, to use accumulated credit hours to fulfill her basic work requirement, thereby gaining time off from work to express milk. If an OpDiv/StaffDiv authorizes credit hours, the maximum amount of credit hours that may be carried over from one pay period to another is 24 hours.
Contractors and Visitors.  OpDivs/StaffDivs may, at their discretion, offer their lactation room/private space to contractors and visitors; however, it is not required.  (See F.1.)
Lactation Room Maintenance, Security, Support, Etc.
Sanitation – a trash can, paper towels, sanitary wipes and cleansers should be available in each lactation room.
Housekeeping – a regular schedule for daily cleaning of the lactation room and emptying of trash should be maintained.
Facilities - issues related to accessibility, housekeeping considerations, equipment maintenance, security (ex. locks, security camera,) involve facilities management.  In addition, facilities management provides solutions for adapting, converting or retrofitting existing space into lactation rooms to include both required and desired elements or features of the lactation room, and provides expertise in planning future building projects to include space for lactation rooms.
Security Personnel – It is recommended that security personnel be knowledgeable about the location of the lactation room or facilities, as well as procedures and appropriate personnel for acquiring information about the lactation room.  A sign indicating the location and designated point of contact for use of the lactation room should be visible upon entrance into the building.

Additionally, security personnel should be educated about the screening procedures for breast pumps and milk.  Security personnel may use their discretion and examine the actual pump manually.  Nursing mothers should not have to put their breast milk through a metal detector or X-ray screening machine.
Federal Occupational Health (FOH) Nurse or Wellness Coordinator – The FOH Nurse is a resource for developing and promoting the lactation program because of the skill he/she possesses in addressing health needs of employees.  FOH personnel can provide support for integrating the lactation program into existing employee health services.
Additional Guidance.

See OPM Fact Sheet and FAQs attached to OPM Memo, Nursing Mothers in Federal Employment, December 22, 2010.

See Appendix for breast pump information by the HHS Office of Assistant Secretary for Health (OASH), Office of Women’s Health.
G. Policy Information
Owned by: Office of Assistant Secretary for Health (OASH)
Effective date: June 21, 2019

Appendix:  Breast Pumps (provided by HHS, Office of Women’s Health)
Many OpDivs/StaffDivs provide multi-user breast pumps for their nursing mothers.  Breast pumps are considered medical devices and are regulated by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  While personal use breast pumps are intended for use by only one mother, multi-user electric pumps are designed and approved by the FDA to be safe for multiple users.  Multi-user electric breast pumps can be used by more than one nursing mother because they are designed with barriers that prevent cross contamination.  When multiple mothers use an electric multi-user breast pump, each individual user will need to use her own collection kit, consisting of breast pump tubing and milk collection bottles or bags.

Multi-user electric pumps have stronger, more powerful motors that provide a higher level of suction for more efficient pumping.  These pumps are larger and heavier, more durable and are generally covered by a 3 to 5 year manufacturer’s warranty.

A nursing mother has the option of using her own personal single use breast pump in the lactation room or area designated for pumping.

Typical Costs
Multi-user electric pumps will generally have a price range from approximately $1,000.00 - $2,000.00.

Personal use breast pumps (not for sharing) will generally have a range from approximately $150.00 - $500.00.
Cleaning Breast Pumps
Electrical units, which hold the motor and batteries, should be wiped down with a clean paper towel or soft cloth after each use.

The electrical unit should never be put into water or other liquids for cleaning.  It should also never be cleaned using a microwave sterilizer.

Breast pump manufacturers may have wipes specifically made for their cleaning breast pumps.

The instruction manual should always be consulted to determine which parts should be washed and the best method for removing parts that must be cleaned.