Employees:
Complies with this Instruction, OpDiv/StaffDiv guidance, procedures, etc., and applicable Federal laws and regulations related to workplace flexibilities.
Ensures WFA accurately reflects alternative worksite information, timely request an update to the WFA if circumstances change and renew the WFA annually.
Obtains supervisor's approval prior to making any changes to their alternative worksite and/or schedule. 
Completes mandatory workplace flexibilities training prior to entering into any WFA.  Training is required annually, or for each new WFA.
Maintains a current WFA detailing any emergency responsibilities specified for a continuity of operations and/or other emergency event, as appropriate for the approved flexibilities.
Notifies the supervisor of a decision to end participation in the WFP.
Notifies supervisor within one (1) hour whenever problems arise that may adversely affect ability to perform work at the alternative worksite (e.g., power outages, technology issues, sick family members who require substantial attention, or other personal matters impacting their ability to perform their duties).
Complies with the appropriate protocol for reporting computer security incidents or when the employee suspects there may have been an incident.
Adheres to the Standards of Ethical Conduct for Employees of the Executive Branch (5 CFR Part 2635) and to supplemental standards, as issued.
During the hours the employee is on duty, regardless of worksite, the employee must be accessible by telephone, e-mail, instant messaging system, or other appropriate communication technology or software, as determined by management.
Ensures all Government-owned equipment is used in compliance with Departmental and OpDiv/StaffDiv policy.  Additionally, the employee shall ensure they use the Department's VPN account to access all Government systems while working at a site other than the agency worksite.
Those employees who telework on a situational/ad-hoc basis should participate in telework at least once per quarter to ensure readiness and to maintain the necessary discipline, approach, and skills.
Be familiar with the agency's emergency plans (continuity plan, pandemic plan, etc.) and the manager's expectations for how the employee will telework during such events.
990-1-70  Workplace Flexibilities
Workplace Flexibilities offered by the Department allow for the accomplishment of an employee's duties at an alternative duty station. Flexibilities offered for each position are dependent upon the nature of work, and in accordance with the ability to complete the activity at an alternative worksite.  Participation in the WFP is voluntary. An approved WFA is required for participation in any WFP.

Telework is a workplace flexibility that allows an employee the flexibility to perform the duties and responsibilities of the employee's position, and other authorized activities, from an approved alternative worksite.  Position eligibility for telework is determined by the nature of work and how many hours of work must be accomplished at the agency worksite during the typical bi-weekly pay period.
The official worksite for an employee with a WFA to telework is the agency worksite.
Options for telework as a flexibility include:
Routine telework:
Routine telework allows an employee to work from an approved alternative worksite following a regular and recurring schedule in accordance with an approved WFA.
Employees with a WFA for routine telework must be scheduled and physically report to the agency worksite at least two days each bi-weekly pay period.
Employees with a WFA for routine telework may also be eligible for situational/ad-hoc telework on an as needed basis and only with advance supervisory approval.
Situational/Ad-hoc telework:
Situational telework is sometimes referred to as unscheduled or ad-hoc telework.
Employees who do not have a routine telework WFA but may have a need to telework on an irregular basis either for mission needs or personal convenience should be eligible to participate in situational/ad-hoc telework WFA. Supervisors are encouraged to allow for situational/ad-hoc telework and seek to make reasonable adjustments to allow for situational/ad-hoc telework.
Employees with a situational/ad-hoc telework WFA must receive advance approval prior to using situational/ad-hoc telework. An employee who fails to obtain advance approval, maybe disciplined, up to and including removal.
Employees with only a WFA for situational/ad-hoc telework should telework at least once every three months to maintain telework readiness.
An employee with a WFA for routine or situational/ad-hoc telework is generally required to work during inclement weather days, emergency events, or other days as required by the agency, unless the employee requests leave.
Remote work allows an employee the flexibility to work from a single approved alternative worksite within or outside the local commuting area of the agency worksite with no expectation to report to the agency worksite on a regular bi-weekly pay period basis.
A position may be eligible for remote work (within or outside of the local commuting area) if the nature of work requires onsite work to be performed less than two days during a typical bi-weekly pay period.
Positions should be designated as “remote within the local commuting area of the agency worksite”, if there is some frequency with which the position requires an onsite presence (e.g., employee may be required at the agency worksite less than 2 days per bi-weekly pay period, or employee may be required at in-person work activities including, for collaboration, on an irregular basis, or duties require an irregular, but consistent, e.g., twice per month, presence at the agency worksite).  For these positions, employees should have an official worksite/alternative worksite within the local commuting area.
Positions should be designated as “remote outside the local commuting area of the agency worksite”, if the position requires little to no onsite presence (e.g., once annually).  For these positions, employees are not required to have an official worksite/alternative worksite within the local commuting area. Refer to the HHS Travel Policy for specific guidance.
The official worksite for an employee with an approved WFA for remote work, whether it is in the local commuting area or outside of the local commuting area, is the approved alternative worksite (e.g., the employee's home).
Changes to the Official Worksite/Alternative Worksite.
Employees must request to change the location of their official worksite/alternative worksite for remote employees in advance. Supervisors are encouraged to be flexible with a remote employee's official worksite/alternative worksite, provided it continues to meet the agency's needs and does not negatively impact the mission including, increase expenses for the agency. Employees may not begin working at a new official worksite/alternative worksite until it has been approved.
Upon approval of a new official worksite/alternative worksite for a remote employee, the employee must submit a new WFA with the new location.
Employees, whose WFA is modified at the request of the employee, are responsible for all expenses that may be incurred associated with the relocation.
The supervisor, in consultation with HR, will determine the appropriate locality-pay based on the new approved official worksite/alternative worksite location and initiate any necessary changes in accordance with OpDiv/StaffDiv procedures, generally, within one pay period of the change. The new locality pay will only take effect once the employee's eOPF is updated.
A remote employee's failure to timely report and obtain approval for a change to the employee's official worksite/alternative worksite may result in the suspension or termination of the employee's WFA, recoupment for overpayment of locality pay, and/or disciplinary/adverse action.
Remote employees, as directed by the supervisor or if stated in the WFA, may be required to report to the agency worksite.
Reimbursement for Travel to the Agency Worksite.
Remote employees who have an approved official worksite/alternative worksite within 50 miles of the agency worksite may not be eligible for travel reimbursement when commuting to and from the agency worksite. Refer to the HHS Travel Policy for specific guidance.
If the employee is required to be in a travel status for 12 hours or longer, the employee may be entitled to Per Diem. Refer to the HHS Travel Policy for specific guidance.
Compensatory Time Off for Travel.  Remote employees required to travel away from their official worksite/alternative worksite may be afforded compensatory time off for official travel, if the approved itinerary requires the employee to be in a travel status, when such time is not otherwise compensable. Refer to the HHS Travel Policy for specific guidance.
