
990-1-160  Documentation, Reporting, and Accountability
Documentation.  Records associated with personnel actions, including workplace flexibility agreements and documentation sufficient for third party reconstruction purposes, must be retained according to the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) schedule.  Generally, all records created in a given year must be retained for a total of three (3) years.  Records involved in litigation and grievance processes may be destroyed only after official notification is received from OPM, Department of Justice, courts, or the Office of the General Counsel, etc. that the matter has been fully litigated or resolved and closed.
Accountability.
Each OpDiv/StaffDiv shall identify a Workplace Flexibilities Program Manager (WFPM) whose responsibilities shall include, but not be limited to:
In coordination with the Department's WFPO, establish annual goals for program participation in each of the program areas (e.g., remote work, routine telework, situational telework, and flexible work schedules), and outcomes in productivity, employee engagement, and recruitment and retention.
Assess the impact of the WFP on employee engagement, individual and organizational performance, and retention and recruitment to promote a highly skilled and diverse workforce, at least annually.
Managing the annual training requirement for the program and ensuring all participants in the program have successfully completed training as required.
Managing the annual renewal of the WFA ensuring all program participants have active agreements in place by November 30th, for the subsequent program year (January 1 – December 31).
Maintaining records related to the administration of the WFP within their organization and meeting the Department reporting requirements.
Reporting.
HHS is required to report agency WFP participation data annually to OPM.  To satisfy this obligation, the ASA/OHR will solicit relevant data quarterly.  WFP Program Managers are required to submit a telework report to ASA/OHR at mailto:Telework@hhs.gov.  Reporting elements may include:
The number of employees participating in the WFP.
An assessment of progress in optimizing the WFP and other goals relating to:
Emergency readiness
Energy use
Recruitment and retention
Performance productivity
Employee attitudes and opinions regarding remote work
Best practices in OpDiv/StaffDiv remote work program
Accountability. ASA/OHR may conduct periodic accountability reviews to analyze compliance with this Instruction, HHS and OPM policy and guidance, and applicable federal laws and regulations
Appendix I - Workplace Flexibilities Agreement, HHS Form 990-1 - PDF
HHS 990-1 - Alternative Worksite Best Practices Checklist - PDF
HHS 990-1 - Technology Equipment Checklist - PDF
Contact telework@hhs.gov for checklists on Alternative Worksite Best Practices and Technology Equipment.