
Guide for Non-standard Situations
Performance Actions for Non-Standard Situations
Situation	Performance Plan	Action To Be Taken
For whatever reason, employee did not have a plan at any time during the entire appraisal period, or did not perform under a plan for ninety (90) calendar days, such as an employee returning from long-term training.	Establish plan immediately.	If there are more than ninety (90) days left in the appraisal period, establish a plan. If there are less than ninety (90) calendar days, the employee will not receive a plan nor rating for that cycle. A plan may be extended (45) calendar days at the end of the appraisal (December 31) cycle to meet the 90 day minimum to provide a rating.
Employee moves from one position A to another position B within ninety (90) calendar days of end of appraisal period.	Establish plan for new position under option (2).	(1) If employee was in position A for at least ninety (90) calendar days, rate employee prior to the position change. This rating will become the final rating of record for the appraisal period. (2) If employee was not in position A for at least ninety (90) calendar days, or was not under a plan for ninety (90) calendar days in position A, the employee will not be rated on position A. If there are ninety (90) calendar days remaining in the appraisal period in position B, create a plan for position B and rate the employee at the end of the appraisal cycle.
Within ninety (90) days of the end of the appraisal period, employee is hired from outside the federal government.	Wait until the beginning of the next appraisal cycle to establish plan.	If less than ninety (90) calendar days remain in the appraisal period, the employee will not receive a rating until the next cycle.
Employee changes positions within the Department during the appraisal period.	Establish plan for new position.	If the plan has been in effect for at least ninety (90) calendar days at the time of each position change, rate the employee. The rating of record for the appraisal period must consider all ratings made during the entire appraisal period. If there are more than ninety (90) days left in the appraisal period, establish a plan. If there are less than ninety (90) calendar days, the employee will not receive a plan nor rating for that cycle.
Employee is detailed or temporarily assigned to another position in the Department, and the time in that position is expected to be at least 90 days by the end of the appraisal period.	Establish plan for detailed position or new position.	If a plan had been in place for at least ninety (90) calendar days, rate at time of position change. Also rate at end of temporary assignment (or detail) if it lasted at least ninety (90) calendar days. Consider all ratings made during the appraisal period in preparing the annual summary rating.
Employee is detailed or assigned outside the Department and the time in the outside organization is expected to be at least ninety (90) calendar days.	Make a reasonable effort to see that a plan is given to the employee while at the outside entity.	If a plan had been in effect for at least ninety (90) calendar days, rate at time of position change. Also, the rating official will make a reasonable effort to obtain performance information from that outside assignment, especially if employee was not on a Departmental plan for at least ninety (90) calendar days during the appraisal period. At a minimum, the rating official will request a memorandum describing the assignments performed by the employee and an assessment of how well the employee performed the assignments. The rating official will consider all ratings made during the appraisal period in preparing the rating of record.
Before the end of the appraisal period, the employee goes on long-term training and does not return by the end of the appraisal period.	N/A.	If a plan had been in effect for at least ninety (90) calendar days, rate at time employee goes on training based on established plan.
Employee transfers from the Department to a new department after serving under a plan for at least ninety (90) calendar days.	N/A.	Rate the employee and submit rating as required by OpDiv/StaffDiv.
 

