
Rating officials will determine which appropriate GPRA/mission strategic goals, outcome goals, and outcome-performance measures are best-suited to define the critical performance elements and evaluation standards for each employee’s performance plan. Performance elements should be clearly labeled on the employee’s performance plan. This cascade approach should ensure that performance plans for all employees support the organizational goals of the Department.

Each performance element should include at least one accompanying metric that is quantifiable and results-based, and each metric should contain a specific target-result to be achieved. Metrics should address significant program outcomes and improvements such as enhanced quality of service or healthcare, new knowledge and insight from research, increased productivity, and quality of service, and/or improvements in customer satisfaction.

All objectives must be achievable by the end of the rating period. If quantifiable performance results will not be available by the end of the rating period, the plan must specify how success will be measured. Data sources for all metrics must exist or must be available in time to meet the rating completion deadline. For metrics that are expressed as comparisons to past performance, for example, to increase production by ten (10) percent, baseline data must be available.

Performance Standards
The Performance Standards define the performance levels, requirements, or expectations that must be met for each element to achieve a particular level of performance. The standards must be focused on results and include credible measures at the Achieved Expected Results level, and at the Partially Achieved Expected Results level, if employee performance falls below the Achieved Expected Results level. Types of Standards to consider include the following:

Quality: Quality addresses how well the employee or work unit is expected to perform the work and the accuracy, appearance, usefulness, or effectiveness of the final product. Measures can include customer satisfaction rates determined through a customer survey/feedback.
Quantity: Quantity addresses how much work the employee or work unit is expected to produce. Measures are expressed as the expected number of completed products or services.
Timeliness: Timeliness addresses time-based deadlines within which the employee is expected to produce the work.
Cost-Effectiveness: Cost-effectiveness addresses dollar savings or cost control. Cost- effectiveness measures should address specific resource levels or constraints (money, personnel, or time) that can be documented and measured such as maintaining or reducing unit costs, reducing the time it takes to produce or provide a product or service, or reducing waste.
To develop specific measures, the rating official must determine the type or types of standards that realistically can be used to assess the outputs, outcomes, or results and progress toward goals for a given element, and then determine the measures and minimum results/outcomes/outputs that are required to achieve the specified performance level of performance. Rating officials should be careful that the Achieved Expected Results Standard allows room for errors. Allowing no room for error, referred to as an “absolute” retention standard, is permissible only when an agency can clearly defend the need for perfection; for example, when a single failure would result in loss of life, injury, breach of national security, or significant monetary loss. In addition, each standard should carefully define the outcomes or results required to achieve the specified level of performance; not backwardly describe an unacceptable performance level. An example of a backwards standard might be: “makes more than four (4) errors per document.” This would allow an employee to make one-hundred (100) errors and still be rated at the Achieved Expected Results level.


Questions that may help determine whether you are writing an absolute standard include:

How many times may the employee fail this requirement and still be performing at the Achieved Expected Results level?
Does the Standard use words such as “all”, “never”, and “each”? These words do not automatically create an absolute standard, but they often alert you to problems.
Questions that may help determine whether you are writing a backwards standard include:
Does the standard express the level of work the rating official needs to see or does it describe negative performance? For example, does it state: “requires assistance more than fifty (50) percent of the time?” A better choice is: “works independently at least fifty (50) percent of the time.”
If the employee did nothing, would he/she meet the standard, as written? For example, does it state: “completes fewer than four (4) products per year.” A better choice is: “no more than three (3) products are incomplete at the established deadline.”
The Benchmark Standards listed below are listed on the HHS Form 704B and may be used to describe required performance levels for all critical elements. Using the described benchmark standard is not mandatory. However, if the benchmark standards below are not used, standards developed by the rating official should require levels of performance that are essentially equivalent to that described by the benchmark standard at each level. When benchmark standards are used, additional specific, measurable criteria must be developed at the Achieved Expected Results level for each critical element except the Customer Experience and Leadership critical elements. While each and every criterion described in the benchmark standards will not have to be met by the employee in absolute terms to assign a particular rating level, the rating official must ensure the employee understands the overall level of performance he/she is expected to meet to be assigned a given rating level. The Customer Experience and Leadership critical elements may be applied without modification and the benchmark standards do not need any augmentation. While 5 CFR 430 requires specific, measurable criteria to be identified at the Achieved Expected Results level, rating officials are strongly encouraged to develop measurable criteria at all levels so employees fully and clearly understand their performance expectations.

Benchmark Standards
Level 5: Achieved Outstanding Results (AO): Consistently superior, significantly exceeds Level 4 (AM) performance requirements. Despite major challenges such as changing priorities, insufficient resources, unanticipated resource shortages, or externally driven parameters, employee leadership is a model of excellence. Contributions impact well beyond the employee’s level of responsibility. They demonstrate exceptional initiative in achieving results critical to Departmental success and strategic goals. Products and skills create significant changes in their area of responsibility and authority.

Indicators of performance at this level include outcomes that consistently exceed the AM level standards for critical elements described in the annual performance plan. Examples include:

Innovations, improvements, and contributions to management, administrative, technical, or other functional areas that have influence outside the work unit.
Increases office and/or individual productivity.
Improves customer, stakeholder, and/or employee satisfaction, resulting in positive evaluations, accolades, and recognition, methodology is modeled outside the organization.
Easily adapts when responding to changing priorities, unanticipated resource shortages, or other obstacles.
Initiates significant collaborations, alliances, and coalitions.
Leads workgroups or teams, such as those that design or influence improvements in program policies, processes, or other key activities.
Anticipates the need for, and identifies, professional developmental activities that prepare staff and/or oneself to meet future workforce challenges.
Consistently demonstrates the highest level of ethics, integrity, and accountability in achieving specific Departmental, OpDiv/StaffDiv, or program goals, and makes recommendations that clarify and influence improvements in ethics activities.
Level 4: Achieved More than Expected Results (AM): Consistently exceeds expectations of Level 3 (AE) performance requirements. The employee continually demonstrates successful collaborations within the work environment, overcoming significant organizational challenges such as coordination with external stakeholders or resource shortfalls. Employee works productively and strategically with others in non-routine matters, some of which may be complex and sensitive. The employee consistently demonstrates the highest level of integrity and accountability in achieving Departmental program and management goals. Employee contributions have impact beyond their immediate level of responsibility. The employee meets all critical elements, as described in the annual performance plan. Examples include:
