
920-1-50 EXECUTIVE RESOURCE BOARDS (ERBs)

Each OPDIV must establish at least one ERB (except that the Administration on Aging is included in the Office of the Secretary ERB). Each ERB must reflect diverse membership and must consist of three or more SES or equivalent members.

Each OPDIV must establish an SES merit staffing system that meets the OPM requirements in 5 CFR 317.501 and Departmental policies. The ERB shall conduct the merit staffing process for initial SES career appointment. The OPDIV Head may assign other executive resource management duties to the ERB.

920-1-60 PERFORMANCE REVIEW BOARDS (PRBs)

Each OPDIV must establish at least one PRB consisting of three or more SES or equivalent members. The PRB is responsible for making recommendations on the performance of senior executives in the OPDIV in accordance with the requirements in 5. CFR 430.307 and  any Departmental policies. The OPDIV Head may assign other related duties to the PRB.

920-1-70 EXECUTIVE RESOURCE ALLOCATIONS

The Secretary retains authority to allocate executive position authorizations (i.e., slots) among the OPDIVs. Each Department must make a biennial report to OPM requesting allocations for SES and SES-equivalent (SL, ST) slots. The OHR will provide preparation instructions to the OPDIVs for this report and for other allocation reviews that might be required.

For limited appointments (i.e., limited term and limited emergency), the OPM provides HHS with slot authority equal to two per cent of our overall SES allocation. The OHR monitors the use of this pool. Each OPDIV may make limited appointments in a number equal to two percent of its own allocation, as long as the appointee is currently a career or career-type employee outside the SES. If an OPDIV needs additional limited appointment slots, it should request such from the ASMB.

920-1-80 PROGRAM INFORMATION AND ACCOUNTABILITY

Each OPDIV must continually monitor its executive resources management program to ensure that it supports mission accomplishment by effectively attracting, retaining, compensating, recognizing, and diversifying its executive cadre.

By November 1 each year, the Head of each OPDIV will submit a self-assessment report to the Secretary, through the ASMB, to indicate accomplishments under the specific performance measures contained in its executive resources management plan (see 920-1-40, 
(920-1-80 continued)

above). Changes from baseline data that have resulted from the exercise of delegated executive resources management authorities (for such things as how long it takes to fill vacancies, changes in pay-level alignment, executive development activities, demographic changes, and other measures devised by the OPDIV) should be provided to illustrate progress. OPDIV ERBs should oversee the development of these reports and should be engaged, on an on-going basis, in assessing the degree to which its executive resources management program contributes to overall mission accomplishment. 

ASMB will analyze the annual OPDIV reports and recommend to the Secretary's ERB whether authorities delegated to each OPDIV should be continued, curtailed, or otherwise modified. ASMB will also identify, and disseminate to others, strategies found to be especially successful.

Overall guidance on program assessment may be found in Instruction 273-1.  OHR will provide guidance and technical assistance for the assessment of compliance and personnel process effectiveness.
 

DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY FOR EXECUTIVE RESOURCES MANAGEMENT

In September 1995, most executive resources authorities were delegated to the Heads of OPDIVs. The paragraphs below reflect the resulting status of authorities.

The following authorities are retained by the Secretary:

•	allocation of all slots, for SES, SBRS, SL, and ST, among the OPDIVs
•	establishment of overall bonus pools, within which individual bonus decisions will be made
•	approval of all noncareer executive personnel actions
•	nominations of executives for Presidential rank awards
•	approval of the career appointments of current or former noncareer appointees
•	approval of Assistant Surgeon General appointments and promotions
•	approval of SBRS pay above Executive Level II
•	concurrence with selections for key executive positions
•	concurrence with selections for executive resource board (ERB) membership

The following authorities are delegated to Heads of OPDIVs, with authority to redelegate:

•	establishment and abolishment of SES positions; administrative changes to position descriptions
•	recommend approval of selectee's managerial qualifications to the U.S. Office of Personnel Management
•	SES career appointments (with Secretarial concurrence for key positions)
•	reinstatements into the SES
•	transfers and reassignments
•	details to and from executive-level positions
•	recertification determinations
•	adverse actions
•	initial pay setting and pay adjustments
•	performance bonuses (within established pool amounts) and special act cash awards
•	recruitment and relocation bonuses and retention allowances
•	sabbaticals and Intergovernmental Personnel Act assignments
•	alternative work schedules (and flexiplace arrangements)
•	overall management of position establishment and personnel actions for SL, ST, and SBRS (Secretarial approval required for SBRS pay above Executive Level II)
•	approval of appointment of non-flag Commissioned Officers into SES equivalent positions.

(continued on next page)


These delegations must be exercised in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, and policies of the U.S. Office of Personnel Management and the Department. Any redelegations must be in writing.
 
