
Material Transmitted

HHS Instruction 920-1, Executive Resources Management (pages -4)
HHS Exhibit 920-1-A, Delegations of Authority for Executive Resources Management (pages 1-2)
HHS Instruction 920-2, The Senior Executive Service: Reduction in Force and Furlough (pages 1-3)
HHS Exhibit 920-2-A, Format for Recording Competitive Performance Standing (page 1)

Material Superseded

The following Instructions (and their Exhibits) are superseded entirely:

Instruction 920-2, Executive Resource Boards (3/88)
Instruction 920-3, SES Performance Review Boards and Performance Awards (Bonuses) (3/88)
Instruction 920-4, Pay in the SES (6/83)
Instruction 920-5, Presidential Executive Rank Awards (3/88)
Instruction 920-6, Removal, Reinstatement, and Guaranteed Placement in the SES (1/84)
Instruction 920-7, Reduction in Force in the SES (3/95)
Instruction 920-8, Furloughs in the SES (3/95)
Instruction 920-9, Controls on SES and Equivalent Non-SES Positions (8/83)
Instruction 920-10, SES Career Merit Staffing Plan (8/84)
Instruction 920-11, Executive Succession Program (10/89)

Background

In September 1995, the Secretary directed the delegation of most executive resource authorities to Heads of Operating Divisions (OPDIVs). The continued exercise of these authorities by an OPDIV is contingent on the successful implementation of an executive resource management plan. These delegations have rendered obsolete the greater part of the Department's personnel instructions in the 920 series. Accordingly, with this transmittal we are abolishing all ten of these instructions and are replacing them with just two new ones.

The first, a new 920-1, covers the broad area of executive resources management in the Department. It restates the delegations and plan requirements mentioned above, so that these will be together with the few Departmental policies and requirements that are still appropriate. The coverage of this Instruction is primarily the Senior Executive Service, but some provisions also refer to equivalent executive positions.

 

The second new instruction, 920-2, covers the topics of reduction in force and furlough in the SES.  It updates two instructions issued a year ago, addressing the need for certain Departmentwide controls in the context of a decentralized program. Its exhibit is the format for recording competitive performance standing in the event of a reduction in force.

Filing Instructions

File new material.  Change Table of Contents (Instruction 002-1) for the Personnel Manual to reflect changes. Post receipt of this Transmittal to the HHS Check List of Transmittals and file it in sequential order after the Check List.







							John J. Callahan
							Assistant Secretary for
							Management and Budget














INSTRUCTIONS 920-1, 920-2







Distribution:  MS (PERS) :  HRFC-001

 

HHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 920-1

Subject: EXECUTIVE RESOURCES MANAGEMENT

	920-1-10	Purpose
		 20	Coverage
		 30	References
		 40	Executive Resources Planning
		 50	Executive Resources Boards (ERBs) and Merit Staffing
		 60	Performance Review Boards (PRBs)
		 70	Executive Resource Allocations
		 80	Program Information and Accountability

Exhibit 920- 1-A   Delegations of Authority for Executive Resources Management

920-1-10 PURPOSE

This Instruction provides delegations of authority, requirements, and guidance for the management of executive resources in the Department.

920-1-20 COVERAGE

This Instruction applies primarily to the Senior Executive Service. However, in order to achieve a comprehensive approach to managing executive resources, some provisions also apply to Senior Level (SL) Scientific and Professional (ST) and Senior Biomedical Research Service (SBRS) positions. (Note that there are departmental regulations covering the SBRS at 42 CFR Part 24).

902-1-30 REFERENCES

A.	5 U.S.C. 3104 (employment of specially qualified scientific and professional 	personnel)
B.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 31, Subchapter II (the Senior Executive Service)
C.	5 U.S.C. 3324 (appointments to positions classified above GS-15)
D.	5 U.S.C. 3325 (appointments to scientific and professional positions)
E.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 33, Subchapter VIII (appointment, reassignment, transfer, and 	development in the SES)
F.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 35, Subchapter V (removal, reinstatement, and guaranteed 	placement in the SES
G.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 43, Subchapter II (performance appraisal in the SES)
H.	5 U.S.C. 4507 (awarding of ranks in the SES)
 

(290-1-30 continued) .

I.	5 U.S.C. 5307 (limitations on certain payments)
J.	5 U.S.C. Chapter 53, Subchapter VIII (pay for the SES)
K.	42 U.S.C. 228 (Senior Biomedical Research Service)
L.	5 CFR 213.3202(m) (appointment authority for placements under 5 U.S.C. 	3594(b))
M.	5 CFR Part 214 (the Senior Executive Service)
N.	5 CFR Part 317 (employment in the SES)
O.	5 CFR Part 319(employment in senior level and scientific and professional 	positions)
P.	5 CFR Part 359 (removal from SES; guaranteed placement in other personnel 	systems.
Q.	5 CFR Part 412 (executive and management development)
R.	5 CFR Part 430, Subpart E (performance appraisal for the SES)
S.	5 CFR Part 451 (incentive awards)
T.	5 CFR Part 530, Subpart B (aggregate limitations on pay)
U.	CFR Part 534, Subpart C (pay for senior level and scientific and professional 	positions)
V.	5 CFR Part 534, Subpart D (pay and performance awards under the SES)
W.	42 CFR Part 24 (SBRS)
X.	HHS Personnel Instruction 351-1 (reduction in force)
Y.	HHS Personnel Instruction 412-1 (executive development)
Z.	HHS Personnel Instruction 430-6 (SES performance appraisal)
AA.	HHS Personnel Instruction 920-2 (RIF and furlough in the SES)

920-1-40  EXECUTIVE RESOURCE PLANNING

Each OPDIV is required to prepare, for the Secretary's approval, a performance-based executive resource management plan that reflects OPDIV implementation of delegated authorities. The plan must include the following:

•	identification of "key positions" (positions critical to the achievement of mission objectives; selections for these positions require the Secretary's concurrence)
•	states desired outcomes in terms of program improvements, including progress towards meeting affirmative action plan requirements.
•	describes the process to be used for succession planning
•	describes planned monitoring and reporting activities in such areas as pay distribution, executive development and mobility, and executive workforce demographics
•	outlines intended redelegation of executive resource management authorities
•	for OPDIVS with multiple pay authorities -- describes how the various pay plans, together with the use of special pay authorities, allowances, and bonuses will be integrated (or complement each other) in achieving mission objectives.
 
