
HHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 920-2

Subject: SENIOR EXECUTIVE SERVICE: REDUCTION IN FORCE (Section I) and
					           FURLOUGH (Section II)

PURP OSE

The purpose of this Instruction is to establish policies and procedures relating to the reduction in force and furlough of members of the Senior Executive Service.

REFERENCES -

A.	5 U.S.C. 3595 (reduction if force (RIF) in the SES)
B.	5 U.S.C. 3595a (furlough in the SES)
C.	5 CFR 359 Subpart F (RIF in the SES)
D.	5 CFR 359 Subpart G (guaranteed placement)
E.	5 CFR 359 Subpart H (furlough in the SES)

SECTION I - REDUCTION IN FORCE

COVERAGE

This section applies to all SES career appointees. Non-career, limited term, and limited emergency SES appointees may be removed without regard to this Instruction.

POLICY

In a RIF, the objective will be to avoid the separation of affected career members by placing them in positions for which they qualify.

PLACEMENT PROCESS

OPDIV Heads have primary responsibility for identifying placement opportunities for any affected executives from their OPDIV. Placement efforts should include consideration of every reassignment option available regardless of geographic location and any emerging needs for SES positions.

If placement efforts within the OPDIV fail, the Assistant Secretary for Management and Budget (ASMB) will conduct Department-wide placement efforts. SES slot allocations may be adjusted to support placements across OPDIV lines. 
 

COMPETITIVE RIF PROCEDURES

If the placement of one or more executives in a vacant position is not possible, ASMB will
apply competitive RIF procedures.

To implement competitive RIF procedures, each OPDIV will compute, and forward to ASMB, the Competitive Performance Standing (CPS) for each of its career SES members, including those on IPA assignments or on detail. The CPS will be computed on the basis of official records reflecting individual performance recognition. Point values will be assigned in accordance with the table in Exhibit 920-2-A. Length of service, as indicated in the exhibit, is used for tie-breaking. Executives serving an SES probationary period who have not received a performance rating will be accorded a rating of "fully satisfactory. "

ASMB will conduct the process of consolidation. SES employees will be identified for release from their positions on the basis of their CPS, beginning with those having the lowest numeric total. ASMB, in consultation with the OPDIV as to required qualifications, will " determine positions for which the affected executive is qualified and which are encumbered by executives with lower CPS. If there are no such positions, the executive has exhausted placement opportunities within the Department. If more than one such position exists, the determination as to which executive will be released from his/her position will be based on the CPS totals. Ties will be broken on the basis of length of career service in the SES andequivalent level Federal civilian positions. However, appointees who have completed theSES probationary period must be retained over an appointee who has not if they both havethe same retention standing. If a tie still exists, it will be broken on the basis of length of total Federal civilian service. The placement process will then begin for the newly identified displacee (with the possibility that not found).

OPM PRIORITY PLACEMENT

For career executives who cannot the competitive process may be invoked if a placement is be placed within the Department (through placement or competitive RIF process), the Department will request the Office of Personnel Management to place the executive in another Federal agency. If OPM is unable to effect placement, the cognizant OPDIV will issue the necessary RIF notice.

PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS

Notice requirements, appeals, records, transfer of function entitlements, and placement rights are as stated in 5 CFR 359, Subparts F and G.

 
SECTION II - FURLOUGH

COVERAGE

This section applies to career members of the SES, including those seining a probationary period. Furloughs of career members who are reemployed annuitants, non-career, limited term, and limited emergency SES appointees may be effected without regard to this Instruction.

POLICY

The furlough of an SES member will be made only when the OPDIV intends to bring the member back to work and pay status within one year. A furlough may not extend more than one year. The competitive areas and personnel office responsibilities that apply to non-SES reductions in force will apply to the furlough activity affecting any SES member.

SHORT FURLOUGHS

For furloughs of career appointees of 30 calendar days or less (or for 22 work days if the furlough does not cover consecutive days), the procedures that apply to furloughs of non-SES employees who are covered by 5 CFR 752, Subpart D will be followed.

LONG FURLOUGHS

For furloughs of over "30 calendar days, the competitive procedures that apply to the RIF of SES members will be followed. See Section I of this Instruction.

 

Format for Recording Competitive Performance Standing
________________________________________________________________________

Name: ____________________________________________________________

Organization: _______________________________________________________

										          POINTS
I. Presidential Rank Award
•	points credited for 5-year period of award)
	Distinguished granted FY    (60 points)					______
	Meritorious, granted FY    (40 points)					______

II. Performance Award (Bonus)
•	points credited for three most recent performance periods:
bonus of 11% or higher = 20; 8-10% = 18;
6-7% = 15; 5% = 12 points)
       FY_________  Rating ________			______
       FY_________  Rating ________			______
       FY_________  Rating ________			______

III. Performance Rating
•	points credited for three most recent performance periods:
Fully Successful or higher = 4 points,
Minimally Satisfactory = 1 point, Unsatisfactory = 0 points
        FY________  Rating ________ 			______
        FY________  Rating ________ 			______
        FY________  Rating ________ 			______

									TOTAL:	______
________________________________________________________________________

Service Length (for tie breaking only) 		Years   	Months	Days

SES and equivalent* civilian Federal service:		______	______	______
Total Federal service, including SES and equivalent:	______	______	______

________________________________________________________________________

Information recorded by:_____________________________	Date ______________
*	includes Executive Level, SL, ST, SBRS, and "supergrade"
