
Law Clerk. Graduates of recognized law schools. Appointments may be made for periods not to exceed 14 months pending admission to the bar. No person may be given more than one law clerk appointment; however, an appointment that was made for less than 14 months may be extended for not to exceed 14 months in total duration (5 CFR ยง213.3102 (e)).
Legal Intern NTE (Temporary). Students at accredited law schools who are candidates for Juris Doctorate (J.D.), Bachelor of Laws (LL.B.), or Master of Law (LL.M.) degrees may be appointed as Legal Interns under the Pathways Programs (5 CFR ยง362, Subpart B and HHS Instruction 362-1, Pathways Programs), up to GS-12 grade level, for a period not to exceed one (1) year.
License to Practice Law. A current, valid license with eligibility to practice law in a state, the District of Columbia, or any United States territory or commonwealth is a continuing condition of employment for Federal attorneys.
Excepted Service Positions. Civil service positions which are not in the competitive service or in the Senior Executive Services (SES) that are authorized and specifically excepted from the competitive service by statute, the President, or OPM. Attorney, Law Clerk and Legal Intern positions are in the excepted service.
F. Qualification Requirements
HHS Minimum Qualification Criteria for Attorney and Law Clerk Positions. OPM delegates responsibility for establishing qualification standards for Attorney (0905) and Law Clerk (0904) positions to agencies.
Education Requirement: HHS Attorney and Law Clerk positions have a minimum requirement of a Juris Doctorate (J.D.) or Bachelor of Laws (LL.B.) from an accredited school.
Bar Membership: HHS Attorney positions require current active bar membership. Admission to the bar of any State, territory, Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, District of Columbia, or Federal Court is acceptable. Employees must maintain active bar membership while employed as an attorney with HHS. Active bar membership is verified prior to appointment.
Law school graduates who have not yet been admitted to the bar and who have not served in a judicial clerkship may be temporarily employed at HHS as a Law Clerk at the GS-11 level, not to exceed 14 months. Law school graduates who have not yet been admitted to the bar and who have served at least one year in a judicial clerkship may be temporarily employed as a Law Clerk at the GS-12 level, not to exceed 14 months. The 14-month time limit is total duration, including any extensions (5 CFR ยง213.3102(e)).
Special Qualifications for Attorneys. At the discretion of the General Counsel, one (1) year of legal experience may be credited if an applicant possesses any one or combination of the following special qualifications:
One year of post-law school graduate law study (Full-time or equivalent) related to position for which the candidate is being considered (LLM, combined JD/MPH, combined JD/MBA, or equivalent);
One year experience serving in a legal fellowship related to the position for which the candidate is being considered;
One year of significant non-legal work experience in a field related to the position for which the candidate is being considered (e.g., working with a Federal Acquisition Regulation, or Equal Employment Opportunity regulations, or other work experience directly applicable to the work of the position for which the candidate is being considered);
One year of post-law school judicial clerkship experience (full-time or equivalent); or
Outstanding academic experience and achievement, to include awards, recognitions and honors bestowed by an academic institution; participation in a clinical program with limited practice of law (typically in third year) or community service legal clinic; participation in moot court and/or other similar competitions (e.g., negotiation, mock trial, client counseling, appellate advocacy, writing, etc.); completion of specialized certificate/curriculum programs designed to build and enhance critical professional legal skills (such as Pathways to Success Professionalism, Health Law and Policy, Indian Law, Employment Law, Trial Advocacy).
Qualification Requirements for Legal Interns NTE (Temporary Appointments). Students at accredited law schools who are candidates for J.D., LL.B., or LL.M. degrees may be appointed as Legal Interns up to GS-12 grade level for a period not to exceed one (1) year under the Pathways Programs Internship Program, if they meet the Pathways Programs eligibility and qualification requirements under 5 CFR ยง362.203(b) and the OPM Qualification Standards for Pathways Programs Intern Positions - PDF. See HHS Instruction 362-1, Pathways Programs, for information on eligibility, qualifications, and training requirements; recruitment; compensation; program extensions; breaks in program; and noncompetitive conversion to competitive service positions (5 CFR Part 362). Regulations do not permit conversion to excepted service positions.